





The president of the European Commission has sparked a major row with the

Conservatives by accusing them of copying Ukip and suggesting Nigel Farage's

party will become Britain's "first force" in Brussels.



In an outburst to MEPs, Jose Manuel Barroso said British people are "probably

going to vote for Mr Farage" in next year's European elections because

Eurosceptic voters will "prefer the original to the copy".



His remarks provoked outrage among the Tories, who said last night they

"disagree strongly with the president of the commission". Downing Street also

slapped down Barroso's suggestion that anti-Europe feeling could take the

continent back to "divisions, the war, the trenches".



Barroso made the political remarks to the Conservative leader in Brussels,

Martin Callanan. He said: "Your party is looking like Ukip. I have some doubts

whether you are going to be elected in Britain or if it is not Ukip that will be

the first force in British elections. Because when it comes to being against

Europe, people prefer the original to the copy. That is probably why they are

going to vote for Mr Farage."



A Conservative spokesman said "support for Britain's EU membership is wafer

thin" and that the EU needs fundamental change. "Ukip are all talk when it comes

to the EU. Only Conservatives will deliver change and a referendum," he added.

Barroso's remarks will be a boost for Ukip ahead of next year's elections, but

last night the party was gripped by a major row over the suspension of Chris

Pain, a senior figure sometimes tipped to be the party's first ever MP.



Pain became Ukip group leader on Lincolnshire county council in May, after the

party took 16 seats in the local elections. The sweeping electoral success of

Ukip in Lincolnshire made the Tory seat of Boston & Skegness one of the party's

best hopes of getting an MP at the next election.



However, Pain is now facing disciplinary proceedings under the party's

"emergency powers", and will form a break-away group in Lincolnshire with

several fellow councillors. Shortly after his election, Pain became embroiled in

a row over a Facebook page, after comments were found referring to illegal

immigrants as "sandal-wearing, bomb-making, camel-riding, goat-*******,

ragheads". Pain has always denied making the comments, saying he could not find

the remarks on his Facebook page and one of his internet accounts could have

been hacked or cloned. Police dropped an investigation into the incident on

Monday.



Ukip has declined to reveal why Pain has been suspended, saying it would be

"wrong and unfair" before a committee has heard the evidence against Pain.



However, Pain said the suspension is to do with a "big issue" between him and

Steve Crowther, the party's chairman - not the Facebook investigation.



Captions:



Jose Manuel Barroso told the Tory leader in Brussels that Eurosceptic voters

will 'prefer the original to the copy'



