





The German government has thrown its formidable weight in Europe behind a

campaign to keep Britain in the EU, describing the fallout from a UK exit from

the union as a disaster for all parties and also supporting Washington's

pressure on London to stay in.



Top government figures in Berlin made absolutely clear they saw continued UK

membership of the EU as central to Berlin's priorities in seeking to reverse

European economic decline and to counter protectionist pressures in France and

other Mediterranean countries.



The intervention came as 114 Tory MPs voted to criticise the government for not

including plans for an in-out referendum in the Queen's speech, a greater show

of eurosceptic strength than ministers had anticipated.



The leading politicians in Berlin said they wanted to reopen the Lisbon treaty

to repair the mess left by three years of financial crisis, supplying David

Cameron with an opportunity to try to reset the terms of UK membership before

putting the outcome to a referendum. But Berlin concedes that Paris may be the

biggest problem in getting its way since the weak and unpopular President

Francois Hollande opposes a treaty renegotiation that could open the way to a

referendum in France, too, and bring him down.



The government of German chancellor Angela Merkel appears to see Britain as a

key ally in its aim of shifting the focus of the EU's crisis management from

austerity to embracing structural economic reforms, restoring competitiveness to

European economies and generating growth and jobs, particularly for the young.



Senior figures in Berlin said that Britain was needed unconditionally in the EU

to boost the competitiveness drive and because of its more open and global

outlook compared with other EU countries. They said the Merkel government wanted

to do whatever it could to help Britain in what was described as taking the

right decision and avoiding a disastrous move.



A British exit from the EU would send fateful signals around the world, in the

US and the far east, of an inward-looking Europe mired in fragmentation,

provincialism and bickering.



While Merkel and senior cabinet members such asWolfgang Schauble, the finance

minister, favour renegotiating the Lisbon treaty to push through political and

economic policy shifts in the eurozone, Berlin acknowledges this is a tall order

because of the resistance in many other countries, mainly but not only France.



Cameron argues the single currency crisis has changed the EU, and is

transforming the eurozone into a much more integrated core Europe, changing

Britain's status, and wants the treaty renegotiated to reflect this fundamental

shift. But senior officials in Brussels warn that any moves to substantially

rewrite the Lisbon treaty would trigger a referendum domino effect, with not

only Britain, but Ireland, parts of Scandinavia, perhaps the Netherlands and

then France needing to stage referendums on a new deal.



The leading government figures in Berlin acknowledged that Hollande was

opposed.The treaty changes would inevitably entail transfers of fiscal and

economic policymaking powers to Brussels, something Paris opposes, then possibly

a national vote on the new deal in an increasingly Eurosceptic country,

according to opinion polls. Hollande played a prominent role in the yes campaign

for the French referendum on an EU constitution in 2005 and lost. A repeat of

the failure could cost him his office.



The differences between Berlin and Paris are reinforcing their estrangement,

with no improvement expected until the dust settles after the German elections

in September. Berlin is also worried that France, Italy, and Spain are stuck in

a vicious downward cycle of growing unemployment, austerity, and relative lack

of meaningful reform. Berlin is prepared to give France and Spain an extra two

years to reach budget deficit targets under the euro rulebook, but is insisting

that the two years not be wasted in policy paralysis.



While the Germans are not making explicit linkage between easing the deficit

targets and launching reform programmes, they are also warning that they are

prepared to help struggling countries but only on condition that the time is use

properly to tackle what it identifies as the underlying problems. The issues are

certain to be raised at two EU summits soon, one next week, the other next

month.



While senior government figures are wary of hectoring Paris, there is a sense of

exasperation in Berlin with Paris, that "something has to happen", that the

problems are well-known, but that Hollande is failing to deliver.



Captions:



Angela Merkel's government sees Britain as a key ally in its battle for

structural reform - and a return to economic growth



Berlin wants to relax budget targets for Spain, where cuts have led to mass

protests, but only in return for reform



