





The constitutional argument for a referendum on Europe is clear. We elect MPs to

make decisions in parliament on our behalf, but not to transfer the powers of

parliament to other bodies. That is why the transfer of legislative powers

downwards, through devolution, requires a referendum. So also, since the

European Union Act 2011, does the transfer of powers upwards to the EU.



But since we entered Europe in 1975, numerous powers have been transferred

without our consent. And the referendum requirement poses a particular dilemma

for a party of the left, which seeks to be both internationalist and sensitive

to the demands of the people. That is why Labour has always had a bad conscience

about Europe.



In 1962 its leader Hugh Gaitskell famously declared that a federal Europe would

end "1,000 years of history". His successor Harold Wilson agreed but in office

sought - unsuccessfully - to enter Europe. In opposition he veered again,

opposing entry in 1973 on "Tory terms", but uniting the party through the device

of the referendum which, in 1975, yielded a two-to-one majority for Europe - the

greatest triumph pro-Europeans have ever enjoyed.



In opposition, however, Labour swung again and, in 1981, proposed leaving Europe

without a referendum - one of the issues that led to the SDP breakaway, helping

to put Labour in opposition for 18 years. Michael Foot and Tony Benn put their

prejudices on Europe above the needs of social democracy. Today pro-Europeans

must avoid doing the same.



On no issue has there consistently been a greater gap between the people and the

political class than Europe. Survey evidence shows that a large minority, and in

some polls a majority, want to leave the EU; but, in the Commons, only a small

minority of MPs favour exit. On Europe, parliament no longer represents the

people.



Critics say that the referendum will lead to uncertainty which is bad for

investment. But without popular endorsement, Britain's position in Europe is

bound to be enveloped in permanent uncertainty, so weakening its chances of

constructive engagement.



The EU, moreover, is in flux. Britain cannot remain unaffected if the eurozone

moves towards banking union. The eurozone in any case remains highly unstable,

and Greece, along with other Mediterranean states, might well exit.



Britain has, of course, always been the awkward partner. There are good reasons.

They were summed up by President de Gaulle when, 50 years ago this month, he

proclaimed his veto. De Gaulle declared that the Treaty of Rome had been signed

by six "continental states . . . which were of the same nature". Britain, by

contrast, was "insular, she is maritime, she is linked through her exchanges,

her markets, her supply lines, to the most diverse and often the most distant

countries; she pursues essentially industrial and commercial activities, and

only slight agricultural ones". That was why she was so opposed to the Common

Agricultural Policy.



De Gaulle concluded that "the nature, the structure, the very situation that are

England's differ profoundly from those of the continentals". But he accepted

that Britain might, in the future, evolve "little by little towards the

continent". The referendum will test whether Britain has done so.



There is a fundamental decision to be made and only the British people can make

it. Europe has for too long been an elite project. The pro-Europeans have been

content to win the argument in the corridors of power. That is why, since 1975,

the argument has been lost by default. But Labour was formed to combat the power

of elites, not to yield to it.



The constitutional argument for the referendum is based fundamentally on the

need for legitimacy. Some decisions are so momentous that they cannot be decided

by MPs alone, but need popular endorsement. It is difficult to think of a more

momentous issue than whether Britain should remain in the EU.



Harold Wilson's policy adviser, Bernard Donoughue, said that, while Edward Heath

took the British establishment into Europe, it needed Wilson to take the British

people into Europe. Today the political and financial establishment remain

committed to Europe, but the people are leaving in droves. That is the basic

case for the referendum and the left should support it.



Vernon Bogdanor is professor of government at King's College, London. His books

include The Coalition and the Constitution



