





Age: 65.



Appearance: Moustache, clothes, a smile, as if he's in on a joke.



I'm glad about the clothes. What's the joke? It varies. Currently that the whole

world except him has been fooled into thinking that Nelson Mandela was a nice

guy.



Whereas in fact . . .? Whereas in fact these are "obnoxious, sycophantic lies",

according to him. "His legacy is a murderous one," he is quoted as saying in the

Daily Telegraph, "comparable, in its racist and economic persecution of a

minority, to the Nazis' treatment of the Jews."



So he thinks that Nelson Mandela was similar to Adolf Hitler? Yes. Obviously one

campaigned for equality and peace while the other led a global race war, but if

you can see past that it's almost spooky.



His opinions are quite fun. Got any more? Plenty. The EU "has promoted and

funded the ethnic cleansing of (various groups)" and is essentially the

fulfilment of the third reich's ambitions to subdue all of Europe beneath the

German yoke.



Crikey, who is he? "One of Britain's most successful political economists," his

website says.



Does anybody else? Not that I can find. He's also Rowan Atkinson's big brother.



Oh dear . . . He's lost elections on behalf of the Referendum party and Ukip. He

was pals with Norris McWhirter, who at one time held the Guinness World Record

for being the most rightwing man on children's television. And the media are

officially allowed to call him "eccentric" after he tried to prosecute the

foreign secretary for treason, according to the Press Complaints Commission.



Yes, well, that sounds eccentric to me. Is Rowan on board with Rodney's

theories? That's a no. There are a number of sibling disagreements. Rodney said

he was "appalled" by Rowan's sketch for Comic Relief this year, which portrayed

the Archbishop of Canterbury as a trendy vicar and used the word "shagging".

Rodney also claims that the Mr Bean TV series was his idea.



Awkward. Christmas at their place is going to be like: "Ooh, pass the bread

sauce, Rodney. It's to your right, if that's possible." Probably.



Do say: "If you play a recording of the Lisbon treaty backwards, it says: 'Ein

Volk . . . ein Reich . . . ein Fuhrer . . .'"



Don't say: "Eccentric!"



