





Conservative MPs start the long process of securing an in-out referendum on the

EU by 2017 today, amid growing signs Labour may try to trump the Tories by

backing a similar vote before the general election.



Hundreds of Tory MPs will turn up at Westminster to vote for the second reading

of a bill to introduce a referendum by 2017, which is sponsored by the

Conservative MP James Wharton.



The Guardian disclosed last week that Labour was considering an amendment to the

bill to propose a pre-2015 date for the referendum. The shadow cabinet is

discussing the possibility, but Ian Austin, a shadow transport minister and a

close ally of senior shadow cabinet members, has already used a newspaper

article to back a pre-election date.



If Labour does decide to go ahead with the amendment, it will not table it until

the Commons report stage in late autumn, and the bill should pass its second

reading relatively easily.



A Labour amendment would pose a dilemma for Tory MPs, many of whom support an

early referendum but have been willing so far to co-operate with David Cameron's

strategy of trying to negotiate treaty changes, and stage a referendum by 2017

if they are not made.



Influential figures such as Liam Fox may speak in today's debate , which would

mark a rare intervention since he resigned as defence secretary. Fox, one of 12

sponsors of the Wharton bill, has said he has no fears about life outside the

EU. He would be one of many MPs who would have to think seriously if Labour

tabled their amendment.



Wharton himself has said that any amendments are likely to kill the bill as it

needs to be changed as little as possible if it is to reach the statute book as

a private member's bill. Any move by Labour to force an earlier date for a

referendum would also cause Cameron to think about how he could kill off the

bill.



The shadow cabinet is deeply divided on how to proceed. Ed Miliband has insisted

there is no need to make a decision on a referendum now, reasoning that

discussion of such a possibility could jeopardise the country's economic

recovery and put potential investors off. That view is strongly shared by the

shadow foreign secretary, Douglas Alexander.



Austin, a long time ally of the shadow chancellor, Ed Balls, wrote in the

Express and Star: "The truth is that the UK needs to decide and I would prefer

to do so more quickly. I know this is not Labour party policy but my view is

that we should have a referendum next year on the same day as the European

elections."



He added that he would personally keep the free-trade single market, but thinks

that "we should decide social legislation for ourselves". Austin insists he is

setting out his own views and not acting on anyone else's behalf.



No 10 responded to the speculation about Labour by saying the PM's views on a

date were unchanged and he would urge people to support the position he had set

out.



