





Across Europe, political leaders watch Angela Merkel with awe and envy. And

rightly so. The German chancellor didn't just get re-elected on Sunday, a

difficult enough task for leaders in post-crash Europe. Merkel won her hat-trick

of victories in the most serene electoral performance of her career, pushing her

centre-right CDU party's vote up by nearly eight points, and coming within a

whisker of winning Germany's first overall majority since the days of Konrad

Adenauer, more than half a century ago.



The only cloud in Merkel's sky was the historic collapse of her junior coalition

partners, the liberal FDP, who failed to win any seats in the Bundestag for the

first time in 60 years. That leaves Merkel with the problem of trying to

persuade either the Social Democrats, or conceivably the Greens, to come into a

coalition which they may see as a fatal embrace. The nations of the eurozone's

southern periphery will be hoping that some such deal is struck, as we all

should, since a coalition with either of them holds out the hope of a relaxation

of Merkel's strict pre-election budgetary orthodoxy.



The Guardian dubbed Merkel the Special One yesterday. And as an election winner

that's exactly what she is. Consider these freshly minted popularity ratings. In

Britain, David Cameron has a favourable/unfavourable rating of 40%/52% - giving

him net unpopularity of minus 12. In Germany, by contrast, 70% think Merkel is

doing a good job, against 30% who think she is doing a bad one - a net

popularity of plus 40.



What is Merkel's secret? The start of the answer is obviously that she is the

leader of Europe's richest and most dynamic economy. Germany's economy is

growing again, unemployment is low, the budget is in balance, interest rates are

on the floor. Times are pretty good, and getting better for many Germans.

Compared with the economic carnage elsewhere in the eurozone, Germany remains an

oasis of relative calm and prosperity. Crisis, what crisis?



But Merkel's success cannot simply be explained by her good fortune in being the

leader of Germany. Even when faced with large German bailouts of the eurozone

and by sluggish growth, the centre-left failed to make its case, just as the

centre-right triumphed. The centre-left SPD remains stuck in its now much

diminished core constituency - echoes of Labour here in Britain. So do the

Greens and the Left party, both of whom slipped back.



Yet Merkel has also won because of her own deft skills. Her republican centrism

means that voters from other parties like her. Her willingness to adapt to

circumstances, most notably in her U-turn over nuclear power after the Fukushima

disaster, is the antithesis of conviction politics. Add to this her inclusive

image and her attractively unpretentious style, and you have a winning

combination for difficult times. Merkel's success in appealing across Germany's

fragmenting party divides is a lesson from which traditional tribal politicians

in Britain could learn too.



What will it mean for Europe? Merkel sometimes gives the impression that she

takes each decision as it comes. But Berlin knows that the eurozone and the EU

need serious attention before Germany's next election in 2017. So this victory

gives her an immense opportunity to write the script for Europe's future.



In an era of weak governments and unpopular leaders in Europe, she is uniquely

positioned now to shape the next decade and more. In that context, the

performance by the eurosceptic Alternative fur Deutschland, who finished just

short of the 5% Bundestag threshold, was another perfect result for Merkel. She

does not have to take account of them in order to govern, but she knows they are

out there, and will be wary. It would be in character for her to temper her

European strategy accordingly.



From Britain's point of view, her re-election could be fascinatingly

significant. With Merkel at the helm in Europe, moderate Tory eurosceptics like

David Cameron have someone with whom they can deal and who also carries real

authority here. For Cameron, an EU deal with Merkel would make an EU referendum

victory, assuming he wants it, far more likely. If Merkel wants to - and if she

means it when she says she wants the UK to remain in the EU she should want to -

she is now in a position to influence the British debate on Europe in a more

positive way than any continental European since Jacques Delors. On the great

issue of Europe, the re-elected and strengthened Merkel may even help save the

British from themselves. Let's hope she does.



Twitter: @martinkettle



