





Britain is in danger of putting at risk the fight against terrorism and

organised crime if the Conservatives win a battle within the coalition to end

British involvement in a series of European Union justice measures.



As Downing Street rushed forward David Cameron's long-awaited speech on Europe,

which he will now deliver in the Netherlands on Friday, key crime fighting

agencies warned of a risk to public safety if Britain distances itself from the

EU.



The prime minister will move to heal divisions within the Conservative party

over Europe, which played a part in the overthrow of Margaret Thatcher in 1990,

when he sets out plans to hold a referendum on British membership of the EU.



Downing Street was forced to bring forward the speech by four days after France

and Germany reacted angrily to reports that it would take place on 22 January.

Angela Merkel is understood to have told Cameron of unease that the speech would

take place as Paris and Berlin celebrate the 50th anniversary of the Elysee

treaty which set the seal on their postwar reconciliation.



In his speech, delayed by months amid Tory divisions and concerns on the

continent that Britain is moving to the exit, the prime minister is expected to

say he will seek consent in his party's manifesto for the next election to

renegotiate the terms of Britain's EU membership. He will brief Tory cabinet

ministers at a special political cabinet on Wednesday.



He would use an expected revision of the Lisbon treaty within the next five

years, designed to underpin new governance arrangements for the eurozone, to

repatriate powers to Britain. The changes, which could involve radically

rewriting the working time directive and safeguarding British interests in the

single market as the eurozone integrates, would then be put to the British

people in a referendum if the Tories win the next election.



Coalition divisions will be highlighted when Nick Clegg, who has described

Cameron's plans to repatriate powers as a "false promise wrapped in a union

jack", embarks on a series of early morning broadcast interviews.



The challenge to the prime minister of reframing Britain's position within the

EU has been highlighted by a series of warnings of the dangers of abandoning EU

justice measures. The prime minister has agreed with Clegg that Britain will

exercise its right under the Lisbon treaty to opt out of around 130 criminal

justice measures by next year.



But the two leaders are involved in an intense debate as the prime minister

argues that Britain should then opt back in to a minimal number of measures.

Clegg has said that the police and MI5, which want to retain measures such as

the European arrest warrant (EAW), should be given the final say.



The Association of Chief Police Officers has issued a powerful warning of the

dangers of opting out of the EAW and other measures. In a submission to a House

of Lords EU subcommittee, it said: "Most of the stakeholders consulted believe

that opting out of this and relying on alternative arrangements would result in

fewer extraditions, longer delays, higher costs, more offenders evading justice

and increased risk to public safety."



David Anderson QC, the independent reviewer of terrorism legislation, told the

Lords committee: "My only concerns as independent reviewer are that the UK

should not put at risk its ability to rely on such pre-Lisbon measures as are of

genuine assistance in the fight against terrorism and . . . that it should not

diminish the beneficial influence over other countries' approach to

counter-terrorism that it has earned through the EU over the years."



The Irish government has raised concerns about the impact of tackling

cross-border terrorism. In his submission to the committee, the Northern Ireland

justice minister, David Ford, said that Ireland's justice and equality minister,

Alan Shatter, has raised concerns. Ford said: "I remain concerned that the

potentially very significant effects on Northern Ireland may not be fully

recognised in Whitehall. It is vital that the decisions made are those in the

best interests of all parts of the UK."



Downing Street has said it will do nothing to jeopardise public safety. Sources

said No 10 was relaxed about the delay in the prime minister's speech despite

anger in the Tory party that it has allowed critics, from supporters of the

German chancellor, Angela Merkel, to the former deputy prime minister Michael

Heseltine to attack the prime minister.



