





Margaret Thatcher arrived at the Palace of Westminster for the last time - two

minutes early - yesterday. The hearse carrying her coffin, draped in white

flowers and the union flag, glided past the regular knot of protesters on

Parliament Square, past the silent sightseers outside the abbey and into the

Peers' entrance at 2.58pm. The Methodist disciplinarian, never quite erased from

her character, would have approved.



Just before the cortege turned up, three ministers - Vince Cable, David Willetts

and Matt Hancock - dashed through the crowd into the building. Overwhelmed with

grief? Not exactly. They were voting to fend off a backbench Tory revolt against

the coalition's relaxation of home extension planning laws, a recipe for

suburban anarchy which might have tested her party loyalty.



Though modest, yesterday's was a showier appearance than Thatcher's debut here,

made after winning Finchley in the Tory election landslide of October 1959. But

not by much. Even then the former Miss Roberts, a wannabe MP since her teens,

had shown a talent for publicity and a capacity to impress despite the handicap

of her gender - one of just 25 "lady members" that year, 12 of them Tories.



"Tories Choose Beauty," the Evening Standard said when the tax barrister

mother-of-twins had beaten the chaps to a safe London seat, despite her husband

being away on business. Finchley Tories "have armed themselves with a new weapon

- a clever woman," said the more perceptive Finchley Press.



Within weeks of becoming an MP pundits were predicting "a brilliant future". "A

star is born," said the Express. The future PM's Labour pair called her

"exceptionally able, also a very nice woman". One patronising Tory MP called her

"over-bright and shiny", another said that she reminded him of one of his

constituency activists "but writ hideously large".



How things change. In 1959 Thatcher's evolving Thatcherite views were distinctly

unfashionable in Harold Macmillan's Keynesian Britain and she was smart enough

to keep them in her handbag. As for some of the rightwing Tories - not all - who

turned out for yesterday's short, simple service in the ancient Chapel of St

Mary Undercroft, they would have been among her most vocal ("should be at home

with her children") critics in the blokeish Smoking Room.



Few visitors seemed to be aware of the quiet drama in the chapel off Westminster

Hall where Charles I was tried for his life in 1649. As for the school parties,

how many of them had tweeted last week "who is Margaret Thatcher?" A Roundhead

in the Cavalier's party is one answer.



Eileen Wright, 82 and a parliamentary secretary since 1946 - yes 1946 - was not

in the crowd by chance. In the early years she used to fill in during Thatcher's

own secretary's holidays. "She was lovely. One Monday I said 'I can't stay late

tonight, I have my floral art class.' The next Monday she said 'it's your floral

art class.' I said 'no, it's only once a month.'" Frugal Thatcher also paid Mrs

Wright in porcelain pieces, not money - "taxes were so high".



At the head of the queue outside the chapel ("why are there so many police and

officials here, don't they have work to do?" Lady T might have murmured) was

Tory eager-beaver Mark Pritchard, unborn when his heroine got her first

ministerial job in 1961.



He was soon joined by Ann and Cecil Parkinson - a derailed Thatcher protege, now

the last survivor of the Falklands war cabinet. Then came Julian Lewis, one of

the day's planning rebels, and ex-MP-now-lord, Patrick Cormack.



"She was a great prime minister, though I voted against her many times," Cormack

admitted. Charles Powell, her loyal foreign policy adviser, and John Wakeham,

her Mr Fix-It, were not far behind.



The Thatcher family arrived last, Carol with what social gossips said is her

"on-off boyfriend of 20 years," a tanned and curly-haired Swiss ski instructor,

Sir Mark, an on-off many things, with his second wife and children.



They too were part of Thatcherism's collateral damage.



Margaret Thatcher never voted against a Tory government until - in the Lords -

she rebelled in 1992 over a referendum on the EU's Maastricht Treaty, the

euro-worm in the bud that still gnaws David Cameron. The PM was not present

yesterday; he will read a lesson at today's public funeral at St Paul's. "This

was a much more intimate service, very emotional," explained John Whittingdale,

another Thatcher intimate from the No 10 years. Prayers, a reading from Psalm

139, verses from St John ("I am the way, the truth and the light"). Nicholas

Soames, grandson of the last British politician to get such a sendoff, was among

those listening.



Yet Labour and the Lib Dems, represented on this Tory tribal occasion by their

chief whips, suspect the Conservatives have mismanaged the death of what the

death certificate called their "retired stateswoman". Emerging from the chapel

(completed in 1365) the rightwing Tory, Bernard Jenkin, put it more generously:

"I have gone out of my way to be nice about people who criticise her. Some scars

will never heal." Nearby tourists respectfully inspected the brass plaque in the

floor marking where Charles I fought for his throne and lost. Parliament

executed him after a public trial and due process. With her own cabinet in 1990

Margaret Thatcher was not so lucky.



Giles Fraser, page 28 >=



Seumas Milne, page 29



Oliver Jones, page 30 >=



Captions:



Lady Thatcher's coffin arrives yesterday at the chapel of



St Mary Undercoft at the Houses of Parliament



