





* If Mario Monti, below, does receive the order of the boot in next month's

Italian elections, he could try a late career change into stand-up. He told

Davos about how a Qatari royal had told him that "corruption" was the biggest

factor preventing Qatar from investing in Italy. "I was a bit shocked," Monti

dead-panned. "Partly because it wasn't the king of Norway talking." That's bound

to bring the Middle East petromoney pouring in.



* Two US visitors were grumbling they'd missed the opening sessions (including

Jamie Dimon bashing the banker-bashers) because they were too early in the day.

"They should just devote the morning to issues that are interesting to European

visitors," bemoaned one. Or Davos staff could leave alarm clocks instead of

complimentary chocolates in visitors' rooms. One of our party missed out on the

choccies, though, and found a sausage lovingly placed in their bedroom instead.



* Davos's pavements are notoriously slippery, but for some visitors the Congress

Centre is also a dangerous place. One woman narrowly missed scattering the

gaggle around Jamie Dimon like ninepins, after failing to spot a small step and

tumbling over. "Second time I've seen that this morning," whispered one British

hack. We'll set a video camera up tomorrow.



* Russia's prime minister, Dmitry Medvedev, wasn't shaken by the news that

almost 78% of people in the Davos Hall felt "better governance" was the top

priority for the Federation. "I knew most people at Davos would vote that way,"

he said. "I voted for another option." So, it would have been a bigger landslide

if Medvedev had gracefully abstained.



* Davos was spared any serious snow showers on the opening day of the World

Economic Forum'. Instead, it was David Cameron's long-awaited speech on an EU

referendum that slightly rained on the parade. Few British CEOs avoided being

quizzed about it - while one US banker waved the query away as he had enough on

his plate without "taking on the UK government's challenges as well".



