





David Cameron will today make his most concerted effort yet to prevent a

stampede of his core vote to Ukip by unveiling measures to stem the flow of EU

migrants to Britain, including imposing fines on private landlords if they do

not check the immigration status of their tenants.



Landlords will face fines of thousands of pounds under proposals due to be

unveiled in the Queen's speech today.



The political centrepiece of Cameron's third Queen's speech will be a promise to

restrict EU migrants' access to jobseeker's allowance to six months, issue new

guidance to local authorities to give priority to local people in social

housing, and place new responsibilities on EU member states to pay if their

citizens use the NHS.



There will also be tougher fines on businesses that use illegal labour.



The six-month restriction to jobseeker's allowance will apply to all EU

nationals who are not actively seeking work and cannot show that they have a

genuine chance of getting work.



Cameron will introduce a new residence test requiring most individuals to be

lawfully resident in the UK for at least 12 months before they gain access to

civil legal aid. But the measures, designed to slow the flow of workers to the

UK, come only a day before new EU commission proposals designed to make it

easier for EU citizens to work anywhere in the EU.



Cameron hopes that such raw meat will soothe the disaffection on the right that

was revealed in last week's local elections. But he will also hope to quell the

growing clamour on the Tory backbenches for a referendum bill on EU membership

in this parliamentary session.



An exasperated Cameron was yesterday forced to welcome a call from the

81-year-old Lord Lawson for Britain to quit the EU. The former chancellor said

it was a bureaucratic monstrosity damaging the interests of the City of London.

Cameron found himself on the back foot, defending his plans to renegotiate the

terms of Britain's EU membership in the face of Lawson's contemptuous assessment

that he will secure only "piffling changes".



As Conservative MPs hailed Lawson for creating a "game-changing" moment, the

prime minister rejected Lawson's intervention and insisted he would be able to

secure real changes in Britain's membership terms.



"I want to give people a choice not between the status quo and leaving the

European Union," the prime minister said at a conference on Somalia in London.



"I want to give people a proper choice between Britain remaining in a reformed

EU or leaving that EU. That's the choice that people will have. That is the

choice that people want. And there is only one way to get it and that will be by

supporting the Conservatives at the next election. Frankly, I welcome the

attention that is being put on this very clear promise."



But Bernard Jenkin, the former shadow defence secretary, sided with Lawson,

saying it was "moonshine" for No 10 to assume Cameron could reform the EU.



Some Tories responded to Lawson's remarks by saying he had afforded

respectability to Ukip. They also said that the former chancellor had given

cover to anti-EU Tory MPs who have been nervous about speaking out.



One MP said: "The Lawson intervention is transformational; it is potentially a

game changing moment. Ukip can say to us: 'You said we were fruitcakes and now

Margaret Thatcher's longest-serving chancellor says we are right.' Conservatives

who want to leave the EU but who have been nervous about saying so will now feel

less worried about saying that."



Lawson's intervention, in The Times yesterday, also led to an array of Tory MPs

touring the TV studios to argue over Britain's relationship with the EU.



The latest development has probably crushed Cameron's lingering hope that he had

manage to shelve the EU issue by promising in January that he would hold an

in-out referendum after the 2015 election. With the Liberal Democrats opposed to

a bill on a referendum ahead of the election, the prime minister is unable to

satisfy his backbench rebels.



Theresa May, the home secretary, will use the immigration bill, due to be fully

published in the autumn, to address another touchstone issue by recasting the

law to make it easier to deport suspected criminals or terrorists such as the

Muslim preacher Abu Qatada.



May will change the law to make it impossible for such figures to remain in the

UK by citing Article 8 of the Human Rights Act, and the right to family life.



Ministers say the Article had been abused by criminals to circumvent rules that

automatically deport any offender sentenced to more than 12 months in prison.

She has already issued guidance to the UK judiciary, but believes only the full

force of a change in the law will persuade UK judges not to defer to the Human

Rights Act in such cases.



Cameron's aides insisted the emphasis on the EU and immigration in the Queen's

speech had been decided ahead of Ukip's surge. They argued that the whole of the

speech should be seen through the prism of Cameron's twin themes of winning the

global race and backing those who work hard to get on in life.



The PM will acknowledge how tough voters are finding the squeeze on living

standards, saying: "We knew the road ahead would be tough, and so it has proved.

But three years on, our resolve to turn our country around has never been

stronger."



Captions:



Former chancellor Lord Lawson called for Britain to quit the EU, saying it is a

'bureaucratic monstrosity' damaging the City



