





A leading Conservative MP said Eurosceptics in the party were willing to

compromise over their demands for EU reform as David Cameron flew to Berlin to

discuss them with the German chancellor, Angela Merkel.



Andrea Leadsom, the MP who heads the Fresh Start Group, which has drawn up a

detailed manifesto for the repatriation of powers to the UK, said that there was

no one in the party who wanted Cameron to "lay down the law" to Britain's EU

partners and that compromise was essential.



Cameron has also been adopting a conciliatory, rather than a confrontational

tone, stressing that the proposals he set out in his Bloomberg speech on Britain

and Europe in January are for the benefit of the EU as a whole, and not just to

appease the demands of British Eurosceptics.



Cameron flew to Berlin with his wife Samantha and their three children after

Merkel, in an unusual move, invited his entire family to stay.



The two leaders were due to attend an informal dinner last night, followed by

more formal talks today covering EU reform, the eurozone, Syria and the agenda

for this summer's G8 summit.



In his Bloomberg speech, Cameron committed himself to change Britain's

relationship with the EU if he wins the 2015 election and then hold an in/out

referendum by the end of 2017 at the latest.



His call for powers to be repatriated to London got a frosty reception across

much of Europe and, with Cameron holding open the possibility of recommending a

no vote in the referendum in the event of his failure to secure a satisfactory

renegotiation, Labour described the speech as the first step in a process that

could lead to Britain leaving the EU.



But now Cameron is trying to cast himself as the architect of pan-European

reform. In a joint interview with European newspapers earlier in the week, he

said his proposals were a benefit to the EU as a whole. "What I want to do is

achieve a reform of the European Union," he said.



"We're in a global race where we have to compete with (countries such as) India,

China, Indonesia and Malaysia. We need a Europe that is more open, that is more

competitive, that is more flexible, that thinks more about the cost that it's

putting on businesses, particularly small businesses. That is the aim."



Leadsom, who was been canvassing support in other EU states for the Fresh Start

proposals, said yesterday that Tory Eurosceptics accepted that compromise would

be necessary as talks about the future of Europe get under way.



"I don't think anybody on the backbenches or the frontbenches of any party

thinks laying down the law is at all possible or plausible or desirable," she

said.



Captions:



David and Samantha Cameron visit the country home of Angela Merkel



