





Downing Street has been warned that David Cameron risks facing a confidence vote

over his leadership in the summer of 2014 if his poll ratings fail to improve

and the party performs poorly in the local elections.



A diehard group of party rebels, who would like to remove the prime minister

immediately, will significantly grow in numbers over the next 17 months if the

Tories fail to achieve a breakthrough, according to MPs inside and outside the

government.



An incipient Tory rebellion was blown into the open this week when a leadership

campaign by the former shadow science minister Adam Afriyie was exposed by the

Mail on Sunday. The campaign, which was hoping to collect 120 signed letters in

support of the millionaire MP for Windsor, has been widely derided by MPs who

have said that it would be "mad" for the party to turn to a relative unknown who

has never held ministerial office. Cameron made light of the challenge this

week, telling MPs: "The Conservative party has always stood for people who want

to work hard and get on and I'm glad that all of those behind me take that very

seriously indeed."



But the Guardian understands from members of the government and from prominent

backbenchers that there is a growing belief that enough MPs are prepared to

trigger a vote of confidence in the prime minister in the summer of 2014 if the

Tories experience a setback in the local elections.



Such a contest would be triggered automatically if 46 MPs - 15% of the

parliamentary party - write to the chairman of the 1922 Committee, Graham Brady.



One MP said: "There is a core of MPs that is determined to get rid of Cameron

right now. They think he lost the last election, they think he cannot win the

next election and maybe doesn't even want to win the election. They think he

just likes the idea of being a coalition prime minister.



"While this group are wrong to think of a move now, there would be support for a

contest if there is no movement for the party by 2014. There would be no problem

in drumming up 46 letters to Graham Brady at that point. I could name them. I

would support it."



The MP voiced the hope that the prime minister would revive his and the party's

fortunes. "Maybe Cameron will turn things round. He is very good when his back

is against the wall. But he is hopeless at managing the team room."



One member of the government said of the rebels: "This is not necessarily about

waiting until 2015 and seeing if David Cameron loses. This is about being ready

for the moment when the party realises that Cameron is not a winner."



The MP said that while the Afriyie campaign was not credible, it had touched a

nerve as the party looked to a future where it could be led by someone whose

background contrasts dramatically with Cameron's.



"Colleagues are fed up with the posh boys. They do not look like the country. I

would love it if a working class guy of mixed race became our leader. It would

say to Labour - wrong again. We had the first woman leader, the first Jewish

leader and now the first black leader."



The manoeuvring has exposed divisions among supporters of Afriyie. The former

frontbencher maintains that he only ever intended to stand if Cameron resigned

after losing the 2015 election. But some of his supporters want to unseat

Cameron now.



Loyalists insist that the Afriyie campaign had ended up strengthening the prime

minister.



One member of the government said: "What this week has done is guarantee that

David Cameron will lead us into the next election. The Afriyie campaign is mad

and far too premature." But the MP added: "Clearly there are MPs who want David

out."



One minister said: "I have been involved in Conservative politics for 20 years.

The Conservative party is never not plotting."



Others were more dismissive. One prominent backbencher said: "David Cameron will

lead us into the next election. These people are somewhat deluded. What is their

problem?



"The prime minister has an incredibly difficult job and he has just promised us

a referendum on our membership of the EU with a deadline."



The prospect of a leadership contest will focus attention on Brady whose

predecessor, Sir Michael Spicer, was chairman of the 1922 Committee when a vote

of confidence triggered the downfall of Iain Duncan Smith in 2003.



It is understood that Brady already has a handful of letters in his safe calling

for a vote of confidence in Cameron. At least one MP sacked from the Tory

frontbench by Cameron has written. But Brady is praised by Cameron and by MPs

across the party for being the soul of discretion.



The events of the past weeks have also clarified in the minds of senior Tories

that George Osborne enjoys negligible support on the Tory benches should he

decide to stand.



12-13>=



Captions:



A vote of confidence in Cameron would be triggered if 46 MPs write to Graham

Brady, chairman of the 1922 Committee



