





Just a day after an elaborate display of unity over the Queen's speech, the

coalition has come to blows over key policies with No 10 accusing Nick Clegg of

shamelessly reneging on agreed childcare reforms, and the Liberal Democrats

countering that Tory MPs were being given licence by David Cameron to vote

against government policy on Europe.



The tension and at times bitter briefing yesterday have underlined the challenge

both parties face maintaining a functioning coalition as they continue to poll

poorly and as the 2015 general election draws nearer.



Both leaderships had hoped the programme formally announced by the Queen on

Wednesday would mark a turning point in their fortunes in the wake of last

week's disappointing showing for their parties in the local elections. But

instead Clegg was forced to concede he had rejected a key plank of the

coalition's childcare strategy.



Faced by massive opposition from pre-school lobby groups, Clegg said he was now

opposed to previously agreed plans to relax staff-to-child ratios in nurseries.



"When we as a government consulted on changing the number of little toddlers

that each adult can look after, the response from experts, from parents from

nurseries was overwhelmingly negative," Clegg said. "They felt that the risks

outweighed the benefits and it wouldn't necessarily reduce costs. So that's what

I still have reservations about, about this change."



But, faced by Labour claims that the coalition was descending into chaos on key

issues, Liz Truss, the Conservative children's minister, insisted ministers were

only "currently consulting on the level of qualifications required to put those

ratios in place", implying the ratios policy itself was immutable.



Tory ministerial sources privately accused the Liberal Democrats' leader of

leaking his new opposition in order to grub for votes among women. "We had all

these discussions before the coalition came to an agreed position, so why he is

jumping ship now?" said one.



But hours later Cameron, dogged by the issue of a European referendum for the

fourth day in a row, also shifted ground when he found himself outmanoeuvred by

his Eurosceptic rebels. In a rare move, heavyweight Tory backbenchers tabled an

amendment to acceptance of the Queen's speech, regretting the lack of a bill in

the speech paving the way for an EU referendum. The amendment will be voted on

next Tuesday.



Faced by the prospect of large-scale rebellion, Downing Street suggested Tory

ministers would be given a free vote next week, adding that Cameron was relaxed

about how his MPs voted. Supporters of the backbench Eurosceptic amendment,

including the former shadow home secretary David Davis, say it is carefully

worded to back the prime minister's position.



Cameron has told Conservative MPs he would like to introduce a bill guaranteeing

a referendum by 2017, but has been unable to do so because the Lib Dems

disagree.



The prime minister's spokesman said: "He is relaxed about (the amendment). He is

happy to look at all ways of strengthening his commitment to an in/out

referendum in the next parliament."



The spokesman suggested that people should not be surprised if Conservative and

Lib Dem ministers voted on opposite sides if the amendment was, as expected,

called by the Speaker.



Cameron will miss the vote because he will be in the US. The prime minister's

spokesman said: "The differences on this specific issue between the two parties

in the coalition are well known."



Asked whether the prime minister would be happy for ministers to vote for the

amendment, the spokesman said: "The prime minister is relaxed about it. The

implication of that is clear."



The Lib Dems mocked the Tory position. A spokesman said: "We will be voting with

the government which has a position on an EU referendum. This is that if there

is a major change in the balance of powers there will be a referendum."



But Clegg is frustrated that the Tories are allowing Europe to dominate the

fallout of the Queen's speech, overshadowing domestic issues, such as the new

single-tier pension and the new cap on social care costs.



The spokesman said: "The government needs to get out and tell people about the

good things in the Queen's speech and not spend another week bemoaning the

absence of a referendum."



Sir Malcolm Rifkind, the former foreign secretary, weighed into the debate

following the intervention of other Tory grandees, Lord Lawson and Michael

Portillo, who said this week that Britain would be better off out of the EU.



Rifkind said Lawson had thrown the equivalent of a "hand grenade into a small

building" by calling for Britain to leave.



Boris Johnson, the London mayor, and the former Tory chancellor Lord Lamont,

said Britain should be prepared to leave the EU if the prime minister failed to

renegotiate better membership terms.



Johnson told ITV News London: "We need a renegotiation to get rid of some of

that nonsense and to make the whole area more competitive, and if that fails,

then yes obviously we should be ready to walk away, we should be ready to

leave."



Captions:



'The government needs to get out and tell people about the good things in the

Queen's speech'



Nick Clegg



