





With the Sharif clan back in office in Pakistan and the Castros hanging on in

Cuba it seemed appropriate yesterday that one of Britain's own landed dynasties

should make a statesman's tilt at a great issue of our time. Up to history's

challenge stepped Nicholas Soames, through whose veins course the blood and

brandy of his grandfather and wartime prime minister.



Admittedly Soames had decided to make his Churchillian oration during the NHS

stage of the annual debate on the Queen's Speech and to do so on the topical but

tenuously connected subject of Europe. But when destiny calls a Churchill the

summons must be answered immediately, accompanied by a whisky and soda. In

taking on the baying ranks of his own party Soames answered the call as grandpa

so often did (sometimes wisely).



Up to that point the debate had been dire. The NHS's new cheerleader, Jeremy

Hunt, made a complacent speech on the service's "heroic" performance in tough

times, as incumbent health secretaries must. Then Labour's Andy Burnham warned

how the arteries of our once-thriving hospitals are being clogged up by Tory

policies, as ex-health secretaries usually do. Between the pair of them and

eager supporters they blamed each other.



But Europe kept barging its way into the conversation like a drunk in a pub.

Labour's Frank Dobson complained that the Tories have opened the NHS to

predatory US health firms via EU contract law, Thatcherite Tory Edward Leigh

asked Burnham if he would grant the British people a referendum on Europe. "Mad

obsessives," was the drift of Burnham's reply. What about the NHS?



So Soames's magisterial intervention came like a burst of Chopin's First Ballade

(Opus 23) during Britain's Got Talent, a tiger stalking the Battersea Dogs Home,

an Eiger dumped on the gentle North Downs above his Mid-Sussex constituency. He

even boomed in the unapologetically posh way Etonians used to speak before rough

trade like the Camerons were admitted and Estuary English became a GCSE subject.



The thrust of Soames's pro-European remarks was that young Cameron had made a

promise and that should be enough. His stated EU policy should certainly not be

challenged by the "prejudice or pub rhetoric"of some Tory MPs - no names - or

their "hysterical, knee-jerk, publicity-seeking acts." He spoke of trust and the

integrity of government, of a momentous decision affecting generations unborn.



It was magnificent stuff and, like many of grandpa's speeches in his wilderness

years (1931-39), was received with thinly-populated indifference and a solitary

"hear,hear." NHS buffs are immune to appeals to history further back than 1948

and Eurosceptics cherish the conceit that grandpa would have been on their side,

along with Nigel Farage: for brandy and cigar, read pints.



But Soames's speech certainly raised the dreary tone. Two speeches later

Labour's Ann Clywd silenced her chattering audience simply by reading letters

sent by voters about poor nursing care of elderly parents. It was shameful.

Hospital buzzer buttons and water glasses deliberately left out of reach,

frightened old people left in pain or hunger while nurses chattered about their

social life. A man saying goodbye to his father before the life support machine

is turned off being asked "Can we crack on now?"



Hunt and Burnham fell silent along with all the others. It was bad luck that the

next speaker was Charles Walker, the self-styled "fruitcake" Tory brave enough

to have once admitted to obsessive compulsive disorder. After genially praising

Soames ("a great statesman") he confessed to personal Euroscepticism, then said:

"I do want to crack on now." Watch out for the switch on that life support

machine, Dave.



