





David Cameron has signalled a "concordat" with Boris Johnson over the London

mayor's return to parliament at the next election in 2015, according to the

author of a new book on the coalition.



After the prime minister said he would "absolutely" welcome Johnson's return to

parliament a year before the end of his second term as mayor in 2016, Matthew

d'Ancona said Cameron had accepted the inevitable.



Johnson signalled a more constructive relationship with Cameron when he launched

a strong defence of the prime minister in his speech to the Tory conference. He

said Cameron was best-placed to secure a referendum on Britain's EU membership,

and called on Tories to "work flat-out" to help the prime minister win a

majority at the next election that would "cut that Liberal Democrat albatross

from around our necks".



But Johnson made a joke at Cameron's expense as he recalled a visit by Alain

Juppe, who was mayor of Bordeaux while serving as French prime minister. "That

is the kind of thing they do in France - a very good idea," he said, before

adding: "Joke, joke, joke, joke."



Johnson addressed the conference after Cameron said he would warmly welcome the

mayor's return to parliament in 2015 even though his second term at City Hall

runs until 2016. The prime minister told BBC Radio 4's Today programme that he

"could make a very strong team together" with Johnson, despite all the

speculation about the mayor's leadership ambitions.



"I've had this conversation with Boris and my message to him is: 'You're a

brilliant mayor of London, you've done a great job, you've got a lot more to

give to public life and it would be great to have you back in the House of

Commons at some stage contributing to public life.' But that's up to him, but

I'll certainly be giving him a warm welcome."



Asked whether Johnson could stand again while still London mayor, Cameron said:

"Absolutely, but that's a matter for him, it's his plan, so all I know is that

he's a massive asset to the country, a big asset to the Conservative party, we

could make a very strong team together, we do today. Obviously, this is all

dependent on what Boris wants to do, whether he wants another term, whether he

wants to become an MP. I think he's got an enormous amount to give to public

life and I don't think he's given up on that either, so we're quite

well-aligned."



D'Ancona, author of In It Together and a former Spectator editor, told Today:

"There had to be a concordat between Boris and Cameron sooner or later. You can

see the lineaments of one emerging now.



"Cameron is clearly not only accepting the idea that Boris might come back as an

MP in 2015 but actually encouraging it. He is hugging him close. There is a

logic in this. It is better to be seen to be in favour of something that is

probably going to happen anyway than to be against it and then watch it happen

against your will."



In his speech, Johnson was generally supportive of Cameron. But he made clear he

would not budge on his opposition to a third runway at Heathrow and his belief

in the need for a larger hub airport in the Thames estuary. George Osborne hopes

to prepare the way for a third Heathrow runway by setting up a commission that

will report after the election.



Johnson said: "If we persist with the Heathrow option we will wreck the quality

of life for millions of Londoners, we will constrain London's ability to grow

and we will allow the Dutch to continue to eat our lunch by allowing Schiphol

into the hub for London."



Captions:



David Cameron watches Boris Johnson's speech. 'We could make a very strong team

together,' the prime minister said



Gesture politics



Boris Johnson addresses the Tory conference. The London mayor made sure to show

support for David Cameron - but did joke about being PM and mayor simultaneously

Photographs: Oli Scarff/Getty Images



