





The TUC has accused Conservative Eurosceptics of using their call for a

repatriation of powers to the UK as a smokescreen for plans to tear up workers'

rights.



The union attack came after the Fresh Start group of Tory MPs said their primary

objective was to see the return of social and employment law from Brussels.



The TUC claimed the Tories were seeking to undermine a vast array of labour law

that has emerged from the EU over the past 15 years as part of the creation of a

single market.



Fresh Start's main two targets are the working time directive and the temporary

agency workers directive, but the TUC says there are also threats to the

transfer of undertaking directive, which guarantees rights when one firm is

bought by another, as well as to health and safety directives, rights to

information, parental leave, employment protection for part-time workers and

equal pay.



The backbench group, representing 130 Tory MPs, admitted its call for a complete

repatriation of social powers would require treaty changes, but said the

Conservatives should settle for nothing else.



Fresh Start argues that just as not all EU countries are members of the eurozone

or the Schengen free-movement area, the same labour market rules are not

required across the entire EU.



"We should accept the differing circumstances in EU countries and enable

flexibility for member states as part of a Europe-wide pro-competition,

pro-growth strategy," the group said in its manifesto, published yesterday.



If it is not possible for David Cameron to negotiate a treaty change, Britain

should build an alliance to repeal legislation, the manifesto says.



Failing that, "the UK should seek to negotiate a complete opt-out of all

existing EU social and employment legislation and to introduce an emergency

brake to cover future legislation in this field".



The manifesto, containing a broadly sympathetic foreword by the foreign

secretary, William Hague, is seen by Downing Street as filling in the gaps in

some of the broad demands set out by the party in its 2010 manifesto.



Cameron is not expected to put forward a detailed list of demands to the UK's EU

partners in his much-heralded speech tomorrow in The Hague, partly on the basis

that it is not wise to set out negotiating demands so early in the process.



Fresh Start has no such inhibitions, saying the repeal of the working time

directive is vital because of specific national factors, such as the NHS, and

the different labour models in place across the EU.



But the TUC said: "The Conservatives want a free market Europe without workers'

rights, controls on the financial sector, equality laws, human rights and so on.



"The PM's strategy is that if he can blackmail the rest of the EU into that,

then he will put that to a referendum and seek the British people's

endorsement."



Captions:



William Hague wrote the foreword for the manifesto which targets the EU's

working time and temporary workers directives



