





Don't panic: a nice bit of policy will sort Ukip out. The Tory right urges not

one EU referendum but two. Those close to government emphasise moves on prison

"perks", and items in this week's Queen's speech that will deal with immigrants'

access to benefits and the NHS. Meanwhile, pundits and politicians from all

sides claim that Nigel Farage's grab-bag of proposals will fall apart under

close scrutiny, and the menace will recede.



Well, maybe. Real politics is built on emotion and tribal affinity rather than

policy - and on this score, Ukip excels. So full of chutzpah and mischief that

he is talking about Ukip-Tory pacts, Farage knows the people for whom his party

now speaks: English conservatives, with both a small and large "C",

disproportionately found in the south-eastern working class (quite an

achievement for a son of a stockbroker, alumnus of Dulwich College and former

banker). If you think the country has lost its way thanks to a cosseted

political class, that immigration and so-called welfare are at the heart of the

problem, and that the Tories have little understanding of life as it actually

lived, then you may well have voted Ukip as matter of visceral instinct.



Last week, I spent time with Ukip in Essex. At least half were ex-Tories, from

decidedly non-posh backgrounds. I spoke to a few of their voters, too. At first,

it was strange having so many conversations with people convinced that the

Conservatives had lost their way: what, I wondered, of the government's benefits

crackdown, or their clear wish to shrink the state? But in such towns as

Wickford, Billericay and Rayleigh, the disaffection runs much deeper than that.



The Conservatives have frayed their bond with what one pundit has called "Tebbit

Tories", who look at David Cameron and George Osborne and see a grim cultural

hybrid, alienating beyond words: public-school conceit mixed with the kind of

metropolitan smarminess that Tony Blair stretched to snapping point. Worse

still, the Tory elite's distance from the nitty gritty is reflected in their

lack of any firm offer to so many of their own voters - what does the modern

Conservative party think it can do for them?



There are plenty of occasions when the absurdity of the Tories' predicament is

revealed. When, for instance, Osborne popped up at a branch of Morrisons

affecting a glottal stop and explaining the downsides of the benefits system

("Briddish people badly wannit fixed," as one Telegraph writer translated it),

did he have any idea how awful it looked to the people he was trying to reach?

Even if the Tories' politics and economics remain essentially Thatcherite, given

the backgrounds - if not the entire worldview - of the current leadership, the

medium cancels out the message.



"We have to break this impression of being privileged and out of touch," said

that working-class Tory David Davis over the weekend, doubtless aware that a

good way of showing how annoyed you are is to demand the impossible.



If you appreciate the old political brilliance the Tories have so mislaid, you

will understand why some view all this as a mounting tragedy. We are talking

about the party that wised up to the end of deference by collectively

acknowledging that the era of grouse moors was drawing to a close, and placed

millions of ordinary Britons at the heart of its most successful phase - partly

thanks to the sale of council houses, the kind of populist masterstroke that the

Cameroons can only dream about. If you read the best histories of the 1980s,

it's all there: in One of Us, Hugo Young quotes Norman Tebbit paying tribute to

people "who want to own things, make choices, live decently", and describes how

the Thatcherites' "patchy economic record" could always be trumped by "an

attitude - the attitude Thatcher herself could trace directly back to Grantham".



Where is that attitude now? A couple of cabinet members - Eric Pickles, and the

transport secretary, Patrick McLoughlin - still personify it, but they are

hardly at the heart of things.



Those who still admire Cameron would argue that the red-raw Conservatism that

Ukip voice will only attract an insufficient share of an electorate becoming

more urban, liberal and socially diverse. To which the answer is: this is as

much about style as substance, and the fact that if you want to bang on about

hard work, aspiration and opportunity, it might be an idea to find people with

experience of what they actually mean. In other words, even if some degree of

"modernisation" was imperative, was it the wisest move to select a public-school

clique to do it?



All this seems to be haunting the Tory soul, but note some other developments.

Among Cameron's recent moves has been the recruitment to policy roles of the

Etonian MPs Jesse Norman (last heard putting the chumocracy down to his old

school's "commitment to public service") and Jo Johnson. And even among those

who recognise the Tory malaise, there is that incessant chorus claiming that the

best way to cure the Tories' ills is to hand the leadership to the latter's big

brother Boris.



That Old Etonian has assets Cameron and Osborne lack: human warmth, the ability

to give the appearance of straight-taking, a Farage-ish personal brand, and - oh

yes - an ability to win elections. He is stitched into the new establishment,

while giving the impression he is some kind of maverick. Farage has been making

appreciative noises about him; if the Tories' difficulties worsen, the banal

idea that he is the answer may gain currency. If it does, I would prescribe a

simple course of action: any tempted Conservatives should spend a few days

outside London, understand the profundity of their problems, and give it a

little bit more thought.



john.harris@guardian.co.uk



