





After a year of prevarication through 2012, David Cameron today finally adopts

the negotiating stance of Liam Fox, his former defence secretary and perhaps the

most senior Eurosceptic on the backbenches. The prime minister's call for an

in-out referendum is a moment of truth for a pragmatic man assumed to be

instinctively opposed to political risk.



Through the first half of 2012, Cameron had dodged and weaved in the face of a

100-strong letter from his backbenchers demanding he pass legislation in this

parliament preparing for a referendum on membership in the next parliament.



He lit the touchpaper with loosely chosen words at a press conference in

Brussels on 29 June when he said: "The problem with an in-out referendum is it

actually only gives people those two choices: you can either stay in with all

the status quo, or you can get out. Most people in Britain, I think, want a

government that stands up and fights for them in Europe, and gets the things we

want in Europe, that changes some of the relationship we have in Europe."



Then in a landmark article on 30 June last year, Fox struck, arguing against an

immediate in-out referendum, but saying: "I would like to see Britain negotiate

a new relationship on the basis that, if we achieved it and our future

relationship was economic rather than political, we would advocate acceptance in

a referendum of this new dynamic . . . For my own part, life outside the EU

holds no terror."



Almost simultaneously, Cameron wrote: "As we get closer to the end point, we

will need to consider how best to get the full-hearted support of the British

people whether it is in a general election or in a referendum. For me the two

words 'Europe' and 'referendum' can go together". From that point, the Eurogenie

was out the bottle.



Yet on 18 July, in a Daily Telegraph interview, Cameron insisted he did not want

Britain ever to leave the EU. He said: "When I look at what is in our national

interest we are not some country that looks in on ourself or retreats from the

world. Britain's interest - trading a vast share of our GDP - is to be in those

markets. Not just buying, selling, investing, receiving investment but also

helping to write the rules. If we were outside, we would not be able to do that.

It comes back to this - who are going to be the winning nations of the 21st

century? If your vision of Britain was that we should just withdraw and become a

sort of Greater Switzerland, that would be a complete denial of our national

interests".



Yet if he was to achieve his aim of a new relationship with the EU, he had to

inject credibility into his demand for that renegotiation, and the only way to

do that is to suggest Britain could leave the EU if he does not get his way.



In his speech today, he makes it crystal clear that following the negotiations

he hopes to hold with his EU partners by the autumn of 2017, he will indeed be

holding an in-out referendum. If he believes he has failed to renegotiate

adequate terms, he will have to recommend Britain leaves the EU. Equally if he

recommends the terms, and the British people reject them, he will have to say

"very well, alone".



His plan has many pitfalls. His Lib Dem colleagues will have no hand in drafting

the referendum legislation he intends to prepare before the election. Vince

Cable, the business secretary, has already denounced Cameron's timing as

disastrous. The sceptics will say "if not now, when ?" Cable will ask, why now

in the midst of a recession?



British business could unfurl the flag of revolt. They might blame every job

lost between now and his referendum on the foolishness of Cameron in putting

party management before the national interest. More difficult, Angela Merkel and

Francois Hollande may not oblige by operating to the timetable Cameron has set

out. They could hold their treaty revision to strengthen Euro-governance after

the German elections this autumn, but before Cameron is ready in 2017. They

could deprive Cameron of a lever into a renegotiation by saying the changes can

be made outside the EU institutions.



They could make the cold-hearted judgment that a strong Europe, including

Britain, is an impossible fusion, and it is best the two sides to part more in

sorrow than anger.



But he will argue Britain has to have this reckoning. If he does not renegotiate

the terms of Britain's membership, the British people will demand departure, so

this is the best way to secure Britain's membership. One thing is sure, he will

hope he again secures the bond of trust with his own backbenchers, at least

until they demand specifics on the powers he will repatriate.



Captions:



Cameron had dodged the EU issue for a long time but raised it in a speech in

June and it has not gone away since



