





David Cameron is heading for a battle on all fronts over Europe as ministers

prepare to reject key ideas drawn up by the largest group of Eurosceptic Tory

MPs and pro-Europeans dig in for a major confrontation with Downing Street.



As Eric Pickles became the second cabinet minister to warn that Britain may have

to leave the EU, the government is understood to have decided that it will

reject "nuclear" proposals that are to be outlined by the Fresh Start group of

MPs this week.



The jostling within the Conservative party continued as it emerged that Kenneth

Clarke is preparing to join forces with Lord Mandelson to make the case for

whole-hearted British membership of the EU.



Ed Miliband warned that the prime minister was in danger of "sleepwalking"

Britain towards the EU exit door. "I think it is incredibly dangerous what David

Cameron is doing," the Labour leader told the Andrew Marr Show on BBC1 of the

prime minister's plans to hold a referendum on renegotiated terms of British

membership. "He is essentially sleepwalking us towards the exit door from the

EU."



Cameron is planning to announce in a long-awaited speech on Europe, due to be

delivered in the Netherlands later this month, that the Tory manifesto for the

next election will include a pledge to use a treaty revision to repatriate

powers to Britain. The new terms of British membership would then be put to the

British people in a referendum after the next general election.



Pickles, the communities secretary, last night echoed a warning by the

chancellor, George Osborne, that Britain should be prepared to leave the EU

unless its demands are met. He told Pienaar's Politics on BBC Radio Five Live:

"If it's in our firm national interest that we should remain in the EU - and I

sincerely hope that is the case - then we should stay. But we shouldn't stay at

any price."



The prime minister is expected to show that there are limits to his demands when

he rejects what have been described as "nuclear" options to be outlined on

Wednesday by the Fresh Start group of Eurosceptic Tory MPs.



These were first outlined to the Guardian last month by Andrea Leadsom, a

leading figure in the group, who called for an effective veto for Britain over

financial services regulations. At the moment these are decided by qualified

majority voting (QMV). The veto would be introduced by formalising the so called

"Luxembourg compromise". This allows a member state to call a halt to QMV if a

vital national interest is at stake.



She also called for Britain to join forces with like-minded EU member states to

bring an end to the working-time directive, which says that no one should be

made to work more than 48 hours a week. Britain has an opt-out. The directive

could be challenged by the "yellow card" system in the Lisbon treaty, which

allows a majority of member states to block a proposal.



It is understood the government will give a favourable response to the group's

proposals to repatriate more than 130 powers from the EU. It is expected that

the report will be hailed for proposing "interesting and creative" ideas.



But the two "nuclear" options are expected eventually to be rejected. One

Whitehall source said of the veto proposal: "There are some interesting points

about mechanisms and, yes, there are emergency brakes in the Lisbon treaty. But

do we want France to have the same powers? Do we want a President Melenchon (the

left-wing candidate who polled strongly in the first round last year) to say he

does not like the idea of Asian financial houses setting up in London?



"You have to think through the consequences of these proposals. How do you

define financial services? They are not defined in the treaties. It is all

single market stuff which is decided by QMV."



George Eustice, the prime minister's former press secretary who is one of the

founders of the Fresh Start group, said: "We have put forward a wishlist which

we think is a helpful contribution to the debate. The government has a difficult

job in deciding what it can achieve in the negotiations. Putting constructive

ideas on the table is preferable to the alternative of everyone obsessing about

a referendum on leaving the EU."



Clarke and Mandelson are to join up in a new group called Centre for British

Influence through Europe, which, the organisation hopes, will turn back the

rising tide of Euroscepticism.



Captions:



Eric Pickles is the second Conservative minister to warn that Britain may have

to leave the European Union



