





There is an old adage that any poll that makes a good headline is probably

wrong, and it is possible that the Guardian/ICM poll giving Labour its largest

lead since 2003 is an outlier. But ICM is probably the most respected polling

organisation in the country and does not have a notable history of producing

wild results from out of the blue.



This poll shows a sharp reversal in the coalition's fortunes. In the previous

poll, last month, Labour's lead narrowed from eight points, a margin it had

enjoyed for three consecutive months, to five. Now that lead has widened to the

largest since the fall of Saddam Hussein, when voters praised Tony Blair for his

decisive action in ridding the Middle East of a brutal dictator.



It is hard to pinpoint a set of events in the past month that justifies a surge

in Labour support. Ed Miliband has had a relatively low profile in the new year,

while David Cameron has played his populist card on an EU referendum.



Those in Downing Street who thought the prime minister's move would not only

quieten the backbenches but lead to a poll boost have been frustrated. Dissent

on the Tory benches over Cameron's leadership and the issue of gay marriage has

continued unabated.



Almost all polls show that jobs and the economy are what move voters most. There

is some evidence that the Conservative lead on the economy is receding, and long

has been among female voters. February's Guardian/ICM poll shows 29% of voters

still blame Labour for the economic crisis and 23% the Conservatives.



It is possible that the economy's return to negative growth in the fourth

quarter of 2012 was a turning point. The chancellor, George Osborne, will have

to work ever harder to convince the electorate that the economy is healing, and

if it is not, that the responsibility lies with Ed Balls and Ed Miliband.



The poll also shows Cameron, despite a year of internal discussion in No 10 on

how to address this issue failing to improve his popularity with women voters.

Whereas among men Labour enjoys a seven-point lead over the Tories (36%-29%),

among women it is 26 points (51%-25%). The government's recent handling of

childcare announcements has obviously not instilled confidence.



So if the coalition continues to bang goals into its own net, Labour can reach

full-time in 2015 without its defensive lines being tested. At the moment it

survives week after week without any serious media scrutiny. But even strong

Labour supporters acknowledge that the party's lead is at best soft.



Anthony Painter, writing on the website Labour List and drawing on polling

prepared by the former Conservative deputy chairman Lord Ashcroft, points out

that on three of the four most salient issues - welfare dependency, immigration

and cutting the deficit - Labour not only trails the Conservatives but

significantly so.



Painter concludes: "If Labour fails to narrow its deficit on welfare,

immigration and debt, and the economy turns for the better before 2015, then its

poll lead is likely to narrow very rapidly."



The Institute of Fiscal Studies said recently that the UK economy could grow

rapidly in late 2014 or early 2015, and certainly faster than the rest of the

EU. At that point Osborne will ram home the argument that voters should not give

the keys back to the driver who steered the car into the ditch. From here it

sounds a compelling argument.



By then Labour will have to convince voters that it has the values to lift the

economy. The issue is whether Labour has the intellectual resolve and internal

unity to come up with policies to turn that aspiration into reality.



