





Britain's business leaders sympathise with the political pressures on David

Cameron over Europe but warned the prime minister yesterday that he needed to

tackle the uncertainty caused by the promise of an in-out referendum in 2017.



Executives at the World Economic Forum in Davos responded cautiously to

Cameron's long-awaited speech, expressing concerns - but not widespread alarm.



Sir Martin Sorrell, chief executive of the multinational advertising company

WPP, was among the most anxious, identifying the possibility of Britain leaving

the European Union as one of the five major threats to the global economy as it

struggles to emerge from financial crisis, recession and a half-decade of weak

growth.



Sorrell said there were a number of "black and grey swans" - hidden or

half-hidden risks - that could derail an already tentative recovery. He warned

that the promise of a referendum in 2017 would make businesses less likely to

invest.



"A referendum adds to uncertainty - it doesn't diminish uncertainty," Sorrell

said. "I understand the PM's predicament. But a referendum creates more

uncertainty and we don't need that. This is a political decision, not an

economic decision. If I am looking at it from WPP, it isn't good news."



Sorrell fears Britain could "say no and move out at precisely the wrong time",

when the tough measures being taken by the eurozone are bearing fruit.



Peter Sands, chief executive of Standard Chartered bank, told Bloomberg TV: "My

feeling is that the UK needs to remain part of the EU. I completely understand

why prime minister Cameron thought it necessary to offer the people a referendum

. Europe is changing, and as the biggest country in Europe outside the eurozone,

the UK's relationship with the eurozone is going to change."



He added: "The European Union has been a massively important creation within

Europe. It is very good for the UK to be part of it. It will evolve. We have

seen that already in the eurozone. It is changing quite markedly. It is not a

bad thing to have the evolution, debates and questions."



However, Ian Cheshire, chief executive of Kingfisher, which owns DIY chain B&Q

and its equivalent in France, Castorama, said he supported the idea of a

referendum that he hoped would "put this to bed".



"It is a good step forward. The prime minister is trying to shape the agenda

rather than things happening as a result of drift and by default," he said.



Cheshire was one of 55 business figures who signed a letter to the Times

welcoming Cameron's move as "a European policy that will be good for business

and good for good jobs in Britain."



The CBI, mindful of the fact that its membership has widely different views

about Europe, is adopting a cautious approach to Cameron's speech.



Sir Roger Carr, the president of the CBI, said: "The tone, the style and the

emphasis of the speech, which was positive about European membership, was good

news.



"But the referendum builds in a degree of uncertainty and business never

welcomes uncertainty."



Captions:



Sir Martin Sorrell: 'I understand the PM's predicament. But a referendum creates

more uncertainty and we don't need that'



