





The latest Tory rebellion over Europe is like an iceberg, which is why David

Cameron has had to change course in the face of it and promise to bring forward

an EU referendum bill. What the prime minister can see - 70 backbenchers

threatening to vote against the Queen's speech - is only a fraction of the

obstacle. Hidden beneath the surface are more substantial opponents and wider

causes of resentment.



Quite why this has turned into a potential shipwreck for the prime minister is

an intriguing question. After all, if you don't have a plan for dealing with

Europe rebellions you really should not be in Cameron's position. The leader of

the Conservatives has to be able to handle an eruption of Euroscepticism as

surely as the All England Club has to decide whether to close the Wimbledon roof

during a shower. It's no good saying, "Who would have thought it, eh, rain in

summer?"



You simply cannot stop the Tories banging on about Europe, and certainly not by

promising a referendum at some point, if a renegotiation of some kind does not

deliver something or other.



No 10 was blindsided by the strategy of tacking this rebellion on to the Queen's

speech, a cleverer move than anything it was expecting. But Cameron ought to

have suspected that the rebel masterminds were far more experienced than the

novice backbenchers putting their heads above the parapet. The suspicion must

surely be that ministers, former ministers, veteran Tories and leadership

contenders are working away behind the scenes. If Gavin Barwell, parliamentary

aide to Michael Gove, is ready to vote against the government on Europe, then

how long would it be before Gove, who has hinted at his sympathy for the rebels,

followed suit?



Cameron should have wondered too why David Davis threw a champagne bash for

Nadine Dorries this week to celebrate her return to the Tory fold after being

suspended for insubordination - and why anyone dared to go.



The reason MPs stick two fingers up in this way is deep anger in the party at

Cameron's leadership, which goes beyond Europe. It is visceral enough to prompt

14 MPs to write secretly to the chairman of the 1922 committee of backbenchers

to demand a leadership vote. To draw parallels with the early 1990s is not

hysterical: John Major faced the crippling Maastricht rebellion during an

economic crisis when he had a wafer-thin majority.



Just as a compromised Major felt cornered by the ministers he called "bastards",

Cameron is being pressured by Gove and Philip Hammond, the defence secretary,

who are trying to take a line on Europe that is too hard for him to cope with.

And more ministers could break cover to call for withdrawal from the EU at any

moment. Cameron should have known: he was a government special adviser during

Maastricht.



Cameron is running out of goodwill among rightwingers, and there wasn't much in

the first place. This is because they too are running out of options. Ukip is

steaming ahead, borne not just (if at all) by disquiet over Europe but - as Lord

Ashcroft's research shows - by concern over economic failures, immigration, law

and order, and a sense that Cameron does not really understand, or even like,

the sort of middle Britons who want tough policies in these areas. Tory MPs in

many parts of the country fear this Ukip surge will take their seats.



The rebels' next move would have been their own referendum legislation. So

Cameron has decided to bring forward draft legislation in a government-backed

private member's bill. Plainly there is not enough support in parliament to pass

it, as things stand. The Lib Dems oppose it, and Ed Miliband has still to say

what his position is. Tory MPs argue, however, that even if the bill fails, an

early effort to pilot it will demonstrate backbone to the electorate.



In truth, most voters are probably not going to vote on the Europe issue, even

though the public currently polls slightly in favour of withdrawal. But Tory MPs

believe that looking determined about a referendum buys trust. They think

Cameron has wobbled too much on too many totemic issues. They need to show they

stand for something.



As for the renegotiation, Cameron says he wants a looser relationship based on

trade. But his MPs have a detailed shopping list of powers - on justice,

employment, energy and agriculture - that they want brought back.



And so the next iceberg looms.



Melissa Kite is a contributing editor of the Spectator



