





This week's political demands for a bill to underpin the prime minister's

promise of an EU referendum have been a distraction from securing growth and

jobs, which have to be the UK's top priority. Today, when I speak at the

British-American Business Council, I'll be laying out the case to re-focus on

economic growth - both at home and abroad. And the best way to achieve that is

to keep a firm foothold in European trade at the same time as increasing exports

elsewhere in the world.



Just as the prime minister was trying to do the right thing in Washington -

showing leadership on the transatlantic trade and investment partnership and

highlighting the positive value of the EU - back home, that focus was lost.



The recent tussle presents an inward-looking picture of British politics to the

outside world. For those in business, it feels like a diversion from what we

should be doing in Europe: restoring growth through trade deals; and championing

reforms that we want to make all of Europe more competitive. These issues matter

to the public too because their main concerns are about the economy, jobs and

the cost of living.



The demands for a bill to underpin what the PM had already promised don't

actually move the debate forward. David Cameron had already set out his terms

for a referendum by 2017 on continued membership of a reformed EU. We already

had clarity over the process - if not the outcome.



Business has to make the nuts-and-bolts case for what our relationship with

Europe should look like. Maintaining our influence over, and our access to, the

single market will be central to that. We have to focus on a positive vision of

reform so Europe does less of the things we don't want, and more of the things

we do: boosting competitiveness and resisting bad policies that work against

growth and stability. Let's be clear: being a member of a reformed EU is the

best way to preserve market access.



There are some who say that we could retain access to the single market without

being a member of the EU; that the UK could withdraw and have a relationship

more akin to Norway's or Switzerland's. I'd urge them to really look at the

detail.



Norway's membership of the European Economic Area (EEA) - being outside the EU

but part of the single market - means that it still pays the bills and follows

the rules but has much less influence on EU decision-making than if it had a

seat at the table. As the Norwegian Conservative MP Nikolai Astrup said to my

team during their recent fact-finding mission to Norway: "If the UK wants to run

Europe, it needs to be in Europe. If you want to be run by Europe, feel free to

join us in the EEA."



While this works for Norway's economy, the British would never accept such a

relationship. It removes none of the issues identified as problems by those who

want to leave the EU. And while Switzerland appears to have greater flexibility

to pick and choose the EU regulations it applies, the 120 or so agreements that

govern the EU-Swiss relationship took years to negotiate.



At a time of great economic challenge, could UK businesses struggling at the

margins survive without access to our primary market for an unknown period?

Submitting to rules without the power to influence them is not my idea of

much-touted greater sovereignty.



The debate over our future relationship with Europe is a worthy and valid one,

but we must maintain our perspective. What we need now is economic growth and

jobs across the European continent. That means putting all hands to the pump to

boost our competitiveness in the international arena and getting some major

trade deals signed on the dotted line.



John Cridland is director general of the Confederation of British Industry



