





Ed Miliband mocked David Cameron yesterday for joining the Ukip "circus",

accusing the prime minister of attempting to "out-Farage" Nigel Farage, Ukip's

leader, and appearing to distance himself from same-sex marriage legislation in

the Queen's speech.



As a veteran Tory MP warned the prime minister not to appease disgruntled voters

on the right in response to the Ukip surge, the Labour leader said that

insulting or imitating the new fourth force in English politics would fail

because the government had a reality problem.



In his response to the Queen's speech, Miliband said: "They used to call (Ukip)

clowns, now they want to join the circus. The whole point of the prime

minister's speech (on the EU) in January was to head off Ukip. Tory MPs were

crowing the Ukip fox had been shot - job done, mission accomplished. Only it

wasn't.



"The lesson for the prime minister is you can't out-Farage Farage. Banging on

about Europe won't convince the public, and the people behind him will keep

coming back for more. A Europe referendum tomorrow, drop same-sex marriage, the

demands go on. They will never be satisfied." Miliband attacked Cameron after

the government moved to address the concerns raised by voters who have defected

to Ukip by unveiling a new immigration bill in the Queen's speech which will

impose fines on private landlords who fail to check the immigrant status of

their tenants.



Meanwhile, there was no mention of the bill legalising gay marriage, which was

introduced in the last session and is being carried over into the new session.



Under the immigration plans, migrants will also face new restrictions on access

to the NHS, with temporary migrants forced to make a contribution towards the

cost of their care. However, Downing Street admitted that the immigration bill

would not be in place by next January, when labour market restrictions are

lifted on citizens of Romania and Bulgaria. The bill will be introduced after

the summer parliamentary recess, following a consultation on the proposed fines

on private landlords and on the changes in NHS charging.



Government sources said the main measures aimed at Romanians and Bulgarians

would be introduced through secondary legislation that would be in place by next

January. These include a residency test for social housing, a requirement for

migrants to have been resident in the UK for at least 12 months before they are

entitled to claim civil legal aid and the plan to limit most jobseeker benefits

for European Economic Area citizens if they fail to find work within six months.



Cameron told MPs the immigration bill was the centrepiece of the legislative

programme because it cut across all government departments. He said: "For the

first time, we will look to ensure that everyone's immigration status is checked

before they get access to a private rented home. For the first time, we are

going to make sure that anyone not eligible for free healthcare actually foots

the bill for that healthcare, either through themselves or through their

government. And for the first time, foreign nationals who commit serious crimes

will, wherever possible, be deported first and appeal second from their home

country."



Vince Cable, the business secretary, indicated that there may still be a battle

within the coalition over plans to monitor migrants' use of the NHS. He told the

BBC's The World at One that doctors must not be expected to make such checks.



"That is not the role of doctors - doctors are there to provide medical care,"

he said. "There is a question about whether people who administer GPs' surgeries

and hospitals should be in the business of checking. Actually there is a fair

amount of that goes on already."



Cameron indicated that the government had ambitious plans on foreign criminals

when he said that senior ministers had examined plans at a meeting of the

national security council last week to deport foreign nationals as soon as they

are sentenced. He made his remarks after Keith Vaz, the Labour chairman of the

Commons home affairs select committee, said 4,000 foreign national ex-offenders

were living in the community, 65% of whom had been doing so for two years.



Cameron said to Vaz: "The situation with foreign national offenders is still

completely unacceptable. There are very large numbers still here from countries

like Nigeria, Jamaica and others that we have very good relations with. We are

going to make sure we deal with this problem a lot faster."



Cameron faced criticism for abandoning plans to force tobacco companies to use

plain packaging and to introduce a minimum price for alcohol, but he said: "On

the issue of plain packaging for cigarettes, that consultation is still under

way and we are looking very carefully at that issue. On the issue of minimum

unit pricing for alcohol, I think it is important we take action to deal with

the very deeply discounted alcohol - a can of lager sometimes at as little as

25p in supermarkets. We will be coming forward with a package of measures. That

is important and we need to get that right."



Labour said the tobacco packaging consultation actually closed last August.



Peter Luff, the MP for Mid Worcestershire and former Tory defence minister, who

was the first MP to respond to the Queen's speech as he delivered the

traditional backbench proposal, warned Cameron against attempting to appease

Ukip.



Farage, Ukip's leader, said: "It was a Queen's speech designed to tell Ukip

voters: 'Don't worry, we are dealing with things.'"



Captions:



David Cameron, Nick Clegg and Ed Miliband arrive for the Queen's speech



