





Tory Eurosceptics put on their biggest show of strength last night, rejecting

pleas to show trust in the prime minister, when 114 Conservative MPs voted to

regret the absence of an in-out referendum bill in the Queen's speech.



David Cameron's aides insisted the vote was not a blow to his authority, as he

had given his backbenchers a free vote, but Cameron loyalists had pleaded with

backbenchers to relent and trust the prime minister after he tried to placate

them by rushing out a draft Conservative referendum bill.



Cameron has spent much of a three-day visit to the US battling to douse the

Eurosceptic fires caused by the rise of Ukip.



Before the vote, he maintained that he was extremely relaxed about how

backbenchers voted and said nothing should be read into the outcome. But the

previous largest Conservative show of sceptic strength had been in October 2011,

when 81 MPs voted for a referendum.



Tory whips said they had not put any pressure on backbenchers, but many senior

figures had taken to the airwaves urging restraint and trust in Cameron.



John Barron, the leader of the Tory dissidents said: "We are going to keep at

this. There is deep distrust out there. Legislation is more realistic than a

manifesto promise."



The vote calling for regret over the Queen's speech was defeated by 277 to 130,

including 11 Labour MPs and one Liberal Democrat.



Douglas Carswell, a leading sceptic, said the Tories would now unite behind a

private members' bill offering a referendum, adding that it could become law.



The result of a ballot for private member's bills will be announced today.

Probably only the top seven MPs in the ballot have a chance of their bill being

debated and becoming law, but William Hague, the foreign secretary, promised

full Conservative support for the bill at a tough meeting of the backbench 22

committee.



Carswell said: "We have to realise we are no longer engaged in trench warfare,

and fight a new much more mobile and flexible campaign. The Tory party has to

realise that Cameron is no longer the roadblock to a referendum, that it is Nick

Clegg, and even he is already beginning to shift under pressure."



Carswell was referring to an earlier admission by the deputy prime minister

yesterday that it was a matter of "when, rather than if", a referendum would be

held. At prime minister's questions, Clegg said: "Just two years ago, an

absolute legal guarantee was given in legislation for the first time ever that

when the (EU) rules change, there will be a referendum. I think it is a question

of when, not if, because the rules are bound to change."



It is the most definitive Clegg has been that a referendum will be required

owing to forthcoming EU reforms, and leaves



Ed Miliband the only leader saying that a referendum is not inevitable.



The shadow chancellor, Ed Balls, said a commitment to a referendum now would be

a massive gamble and a diversion from the economic crisis.



But Clegg said his party would not let the Conservatives give government time to

a private member's bill. He said: "The Conservative party are perfectly free for

their own reasons to move the goalposts." But he added: "Legislation is already

in place, and the people of Britain have a guarantee about when a referendum

will take place."



The prime minister said his three-pronged approach - reform, renegotiation, and

then a referendum by the end of 2017 - was right for Britain. He contrasted this

with Labour and the Liberal Democrats.



"You have a very clear policy from the Conservatives. The focus should be on the

other parties. Well, what is your position? Are you going to trust the British

people and allow them to have a say? We have a very very clear, popular, right

position that is in the national interest and the other parties have now got to

make their minds up."



