





The term "Blairite" is the most ubiquitous in British politics and also the most

misleading. We hear that Blairites want an apology to be made for the previous

Labour government's spending record, that Blairites are in despair about Ed

Miliband's opposition to immediate military intervention in Syria, Blairites

ached for the Blairite elder brother to come to the rescue and now fume about a

reshuffle that targeted Blairites. These Blairites are everywhere. In reality

they are nowhere. They do not exist.



Take the first point, that Blairites stand for George Osborne-style rigidity on

public spending. In all the epic internal rows inside the last government there

were very few over the level of public spending. Indeed it was Tony Blair who

announced on a TV sofa that UK spending on health would soar to the level of the

European Union average. At the time he had not worked out how the money would be

raised. Today's Blairites would despair at such recklessness.



After the 2005 election Blair wanted more public spending on Iraq and

Afghanistan, academies, law and order measures and public service reforms that

were costing a fortune to implement. If the Blairites are tough on public

spending, their founding father was not, for quite a lot of the time.



But who are the Blairites? David Miliband is often cited as one. Yet he came to

regard the war in Iraq as a "disaster" and was moved from his role as head of

policy in No 10 because he was not regarded as Blairite enough. He was replaced

by Andrew Adonis, who is often seen as the leading Blairite. Adonis is an

admirer of Blair, but his hero is Roy Jenkins, more recognisably a social

democrat and a passionate opponent of military intervention in Iraq. As a highly

effective cabinet minister Adonis nationalised a train company, developed plans

for high-speed rail and is now an advocate of an active industrial policy that

would have worried early Blair and perhaps later Blair too, on the grounds that

it might be seen, wrongly, as a return to the 1970s.



The shadow foreign secretary, Douglas Alexander, is sometimes described as a

Blairite. Yet when Blair was prime minister he spoke critically and insightfully

about the dangers of "Blairite exceptionalism", the idea that a party supposedly

on the centre-left can only win with a leader who seeks definition against it.

Alexander was the architect of the Commons' vote against immediate military

action in Syria, an act that alarmed Blair. The Blairite Alexander disagreed

with Blair on one of the most contentious issues of recent times.



There are self-proclaimed Blairites in the Conservative party too. Michael Gove

never loses the opportunity to declare that he is one. Yet Gove recently told a

BBC interviewer that if there were a referendum now on the UK's membership of

the EU he would vote to leave. Blair is such a passionate supporter of British

membership of the EU that he hoped to become its president. On another of the

biggest issues of our times, the Blairite Gove is at the opposite end of the

argument to Blair.



Recently I read that Nick Clegg is the Blairites' new hero, and yet the Blairite

Adonis is a staunch critic of Clegg, regarding him as a Conservative.

Nonetheless Clegg speaks, like Blair, of his support for social justice and

economic competence. But then again part of Blair's genius was to make the banal

seem profound. The key debate for those who delve more deeply is over the means

to agreed ends. More widely there are big differences between the two. Blair was

an authoritarian in some respects, supporting a series of measures that

constrained civil liberties. Clegg's support for civil liberties is such that he

has put the eccentric Norman Baker in the Home Office. When Clegg stood in for

Cameron at prime minister's questions he made waves by describing the war in

Iraq as illegal.



In the media there is an army of Blairites, but study them closer and the same

maze of divergent views arise. Blair's biographer John Rentoul is seen as the

ultimate Blairite. Yet Rentoul is a Eurosceptic who believes that Ed Balls'

Keynesian interpretation of economic policy in 2010 was broadly correct.



There are some in the Labour party who agree more with Cameron and Osborne than

with Miliband. They are on the centre-right without quite realising it. But a

lot of those mentioned here have moved on from the 1970s and 80s, the

election-losing decades that shaped Blair's approach to politics. None of them

are Blairites, not even Blair.



Steve Richards is author of Whatever It Takes, a study of New Labour



