





Ed Miliband yesterday risked alienating some voters, and unnerving sections of

his own shadow cabinet, when he stood firm, saying he was opposed to an in-out

referendum on the terms proposed by David Cameron.



The Tories seized on his statement, claiming he was against an in-out referendum

, but Miliband's aides said the party only opposed a referendum now.



However, the Conservatives were confident that the Labour leader had made a

disastrous political error for which he would pay a price at the next election.

Grant Shapps, the Conservative chairman, said: "It's clear that Labour doesn't

trust the British public to have their say on their country's future."



But those senior members of the shadow cabinet that would have preferred a

clearer pro-referendum line bit their lips, saying the option remained open.

Others claimed Cameron would enjoy a short-term hit, but that the speech would

not age well. Some senior backbenchers such as Keith Vaz, the home affairs

select committee chairman and a former Europe minister, openly called for a

referendum, but surprisingly few Labour voices called for Miliband to follow

Cameron.



Those most sympathetic to a referendum forced a shadow cabinet discussion a

fortnight ago to tilt the party's European policy - to make it clearer that

Labour would keep its options open on a referendum, and not appear to be

advocates of a status quo in Europe. That view was reflected in Miliband's

recent broadcast interviews and the definitive speech to Chatham House delivered

by the shadow foreign secretary, Douglas Alexander.



Among those pushing this stance were shadow chancellor, Ed Balls, and the head

of the party's policy review, Jon Cruddas, an unabashed advocate of a referendum

.



Although there are different attitudes to Europe inside the Labour leadership,

there is little of the visceral hatred found in the Conservative party and the

debate is as much about political tactics as anything. One source said: "It

depends how important Europe becomes in the election. As Lord Ashcroft's polling

shows, it is not that important with most voters, but if the issue of whether a

party is holding a referendum or not becomes important, then that becomes a

problem for us."



Since the shadow cabinet discussion, Miliband has emphasised that Labour has

supported the legal lock passed in the 2011 European Union Act that requires a

referendum if there is a transfer of powers from Westminster to Brussels.



Lawyers dispute precisely when that referendum might be triggered by the act,

but it is agreed an increase in majority voting at EU level, so reducing

national sovereignty, would require a referendum.



If Miliband found himself in a serious political hole on the need to offer a

referendum, it would be possible for him - in 12 to 18 months' time - to say

events in Europe show there will be a transfer of sovereignty and so a

referendum is required. Miliband would be seen to be awkwardly following the

lead of Cameron, but that is not politically disastrous.



The current position has allowed most of the big pro-European voices - Miliband,

Alexander, Balls, Tony Blair and Lord Mandelson - to unite around the argument

that it is damaging to the British economic interest to put a five-year question

mark over membership of the single market.



Blair said yesterday: "I think it's a huge worry in circumstances where you put

on the agenda the prospect of Britain leaving. Why would we do that? We don't

yet know what we are proposing or what we can get negotiated. We don't yet know

what the rest of Europe is going to propose. I don't believe in a referendum

unless it's necessary to do it. This referendum will happen in four or five

years' time."



He said that, as a tactic, "it reminds me a bit of the Mel Brooks comedy Blazing

Saddles where the sheriff says at one point during it - holds a gun to his own

head and says, 'If you don't do what I want, I'll blow my brains out'. You know,

you want to watch that one of the 26 (other EU states) don't just say, 'Well OK,

go ahead.'"



Alexander questioned Cameron's timing and motive, pointing out: "There are no

changes being considered in the eurozone that impact on British sovereignty and,

if there are any changes that lead to a transfer of power from Britain to

Brussels, then according to the law we already have on the statute book that

would automatically trigger a referendum."



He said he supported changes to the EU but added: "The idea that you put a gun

to the head of your EU partners and stand in the departure lounge shouting at 26

other members of European Union as the way to get those changes does not make

sense to me".



Mandelson, who is one of many pointing out Europe can help to restore Labour's

relationship with business, said Cameron's speech was "about pleasing a party

audience and the people who he used to call the fruitcakes and headbangers".



Miliband's stance has the additional benefit of being almost identical to that

of Lib Dem leader Nick Clegg, so giving both parties some mutual political

cover.



Clegg said: "The priority of the Liberal Democrats is to build a stronger

economy in a fairer society. Now, that job is made all the harder if we have

years of grinding uncertainty because of an ill-defined, protracted

renegotiation of Britain's status within the European Union.



"My priority remains, and will always remain: yes, reform in Europe; yes, a

referendum where the circumstances are right, as we've set out in law; but,

above and beyond anything else, promoting growth and jobs."



The similarity of the two leaders' stances is not lost on those that look

forward to the prospect of another hung parliament. If the voters give him a

genuine choice of parties in 2015, is Clegg more likely to join forces with

Cameron, with his ambitious plan to negotiate European optouts until November

2017, or Miliband?



