





For years the electorate has overwhelmingly opposed Britain's membership of the

European Union - particularly those who work for a living. Yet while movements

in other countries that are critical of the EU are led by the left, in Britain

they are dominated by the hard right, and working-class concerns are largely

ignored.



This is particularly strange when you consider the EU is largely a Tory

neoliberal project. Not only did the Conservative prime minister Edward Heath

take Britain into the common market in 1973, but Margaret Thatcher campaigned to

stay in it in the 1975 referendum, and was one of the architects of the Single

European Act - which gave us the single market, EU militarisation and eventually

the struggling euro. John Major rammed through the Maastricht treaty and

embarked on the disastrous privatisation of our railways using EU directives.



Even now, the majority of David Cameron's Tories will campaign for staying in

the EU if we do get the referendum the electorate so clearly wants. And most of

the left seems to be lining up alongside them. My union stood in the last

European elections under the No2EU-Yes to Democracy coalition, which set out to

give working people a voice and to challenge the politics of the racist British

National party, yet the BNP received far more media coverage. Today it is Ukip

that is enjoying the media spotlight. Its rightwing Thatcherite rhetoric is a

gift to a political establishment that seeks to project a narrow agenda of

continued EU membership.



But the reality is that Ukip supports the EU agenda of privatisation, cuts and

austerity. It opposes the renationalisation of our rail network as much as any

Eurocrat. Yet Ukip has filled the political vacuum created when the Labour party

and parts of the trade union movement adopted the position of EU cheerleaders,

believing in the myth of "social Europe".



Social EU legislation, which supposedly leads to better working conditions, has

not saved one job and is riddled with opt-outs for employers. It is making

zero-hour contracts and agency-working the norm while undermining collective

bargaining and full-time, secure employment. Meanwhile, 10,000 manufacturing

jobs in the East Midlands still hang in the balance because EU law demanded that

the crucial Thameslink contract go to Siemens in Germany rather than Bombardier

in Derby.



Today, unemployment in the eurozone is at a record 12%. In the countries hit

hardest, youth unemployment tops 60% and the millions of personal tragedies of

lost homes, jobs, pensions and services are testament to the sick joke of

"social Europe".



The raft of EU treaties are, as Tony Benn once said, nothing more than a

cast-iron manifesto for capitalism that demands the chaos of the complete free

movement of capital, goods, services and labour. The EU sees the current crisis

as an opportunity to speed up its privatisation drive. Mass unemployment and

economic decline is a price worth paying for structural adjustment in favour of

monopoly capitalism.



In Britain and across the EU, every public service faces privatisation and

fragmentation. Indeed, the clause in the Health and Social Care Act demanding

privatisation of every aspect of our NHS was defended by the Lib Dems on the

basis of EU competition law.



But governments do not have to carry out such EU policies: they could carry out

measures on behalf of those who elect them. That means having democratic control

over capital flows, our borders and the future of our economy for the benefit of

everyone.



The only rational course is to leave the EU so elected governments regain the

democratic power to decide matters on behalf of the people they serve.



Bob Crow is general secretary of the RMT



