





"I am in favour of a referendum. I believe in confronting this issue - shaping

it, leading the debate. Not simply hoping a difficult situation will go away."



Aimed at mainstream Eurosceptics



such as Andrea Leadsom MP (pictured)



David Cameron took a giant step in mending fences with a large number of

Conservative MPs who were upset when he imposed a three-line whip in October

2011 opposing a referendum on Britain's EU membership. A total of 81 Tory MPs

rebelled. Mark Pritchard, one of the rebel ringleaders, welcomed the speech when

he tweeted: "Congratulation to the prime minister on becoming the 82nd Tory

rebel. We're all in this together!"



"I understand the impatience of wanting to make that choice (on continued

membership) immediately. But I don't believe that to make a decision at this

moment is the right way forward, either for Britain or for Europe as a whole. A

vote today between the status quo and leaving would be an entirely false

choice."



Aimed at hardline Eurosceptics



There is such mistruct between Downing Street and some hardline Eurosceptics

that No 10 was bracing itself for criticism for its plan to delay the referendum

for five years. The Tory MEP Dan Hannan (right), who wants Britain to leave the

EU and who has led calls for a referendum, was delighted. But the MP John Baron,

who persuaded 100 colleagues to sign a letter last year calling for a referendum

, said the prime minister should legislate for the referendum now.



"If we don't address these challenges, the danger is that Europe will fail and

the British people will drift towards the exit. I do not want that to happen. I

want the European Union to be a success. And I want a relationship between

Britain and the EU that keeps us in it."



Aimed at pro-Europeans



The prime minister believes he is doing pro-Europeans a favour by addressing

"public disillusionment" with the EU in a way that could stabilise Britain's

position in the EU. He believes that a major repatriation of powers would

address the democratic consent for the EU which he described as "wafer thin".

Kenneth Clarke, who told the FT recently that referendums are usually proposed

by "hangers and floggers", will give his response next week.



"I say to our European partners, frustrated as some of them no doubt are by

Britain's attitude: work with us on this . . . Just as I believe that Britain

should want to remain in the EU so the EU should want us to stay"



Aimed at European leaders



He made a point of briefing Angela Merkel and other EU leaders on his speech. He

wants to make clear to Britain's 26 EU partners that his plan to repatriate

powers, to be endorsed in a referendum, is not a hostile act. A successful

negotiation would lead to a great prize: settled British membership of the EU.



"We would have to think carefully too about the impact on our influence at the

top table of international affairs. There is no doubt that we are more powerful

in Washington, in Beijing, in Delhi because we are a powerful player in the

European Union"



Aimed at Barack Obama



Cameron knows that the US believes Britain should remain an influential member

of the EU because Washington believes European integration is the best way of

ensuring stability on the continent that has caused it such grief. US interests

also lie in ensuring that such a staunch ally can influence the EU.



"We should also remember how the shift in Europe from war to sustained peace

came about. It did not happen like a change in the weather. It happened because

of determined work over generations."



Aimed at praising the EU's founding fathers



The prime minister began his speech as Margaret Thatcher ended her landmark

Bruges speech in 1988 - praising the architects of European co-operation. Unlike

Thatcher, who named the "remarkable" late Belgian prime minister Paul Henri

Spaak, who chaired the committee that led to the eventual formation of the EEC,

Cameron did not name any of the fathers of the EU.



