





David Cameron will today come under attack from Vince Cable as the business

secretary accuses him of choosing "a terrible time" to raise the threat of

Britain's exit from the EU, saying the prime minister's strategy "will add to

the sense of an unresolved economic crisis in the UK".



Ministers privately admitted that Cameron's speech tomorrow in the Netherlands

was the result of a mistake last summer by the prime minister, and has raised

expectations to a level that will be hard to meet.



On another day when Cameron's strategy was challenged by some in his own party,

his Liberal Democrat coalition partners, and even his Dutch hosts, the PM

briefed senior MPs on the contents of his definitive statement of his Euro

beliefs.



The speech will include a restatement of his belief that Britain should remain

inside a reformed EU, set out some specific negotiating demands and promise a

referendum in the next parliament.



Ministers hope to include one piece of red meat to satisfy the appetites of the

Eurosceptics, notably an admission that Britain could survive outside the EU.

They concede the Cameron speech may have spiralled out of control, and was

largely the product of an article that appeared in the Sunday Telegraph written

to compensate for remarks he made in Brussels opposing Britain's exit from the

EU.



In the runup to the speech, a group of prominent City figures have written to

the Telegraph in support of an in-out referendum, and a group of 30 pro-European

Tory MPs, including Ken Clarke and Sir Malcolm Rifkind, have written a letter

charging the prime minister with jeopardising Margaret Thatcher's foremost

European legacy, the single market.



The MPs warn: "We fear that a renegotiation which seems to favour the UK alone

would force other capitals to ask why they cannot simply dispense with those

parts of the single market that don't suit them, potentially endangering

Margaret Thatcher's defining European legacy."



But attention is likely to focus on Cable's speech in Oxfordshire accusing

Cameron of a dangerous gamble that could throttle the UK's return to growth. The

business secretary will warn: "It will be difficult enough to safeguard UK

national interests in the single market in an environment where the UK stands

aside from closer economic and political integration in the eurozone. It could

become next to impossible if the UK is simultaneously seeking to disengage from

substantial existing commitments, especially if we are perceived to be blocking

closer integration in projects we are not part of.



"The Eurosceptic calculation is that British permission is necessary for closer

integration - via treaty change - and that this permission can be traded for the

negotiating objectives. That seems to me a dangerous gamble to make.



"There are many in Europe who would be happy to see the back of the UK -

whatever that may mean in practice - and even the UK's allies on market reform,

notably Germany, have limited political capital to spend getting a more

favourable arrangement for the UK."



Cable will say it is legitimate for Britain to seek reforms, but this process

"is not helped by threats to walk out when we don't get our way".



He concedes that a referendum could "lance the boil of suspicion that British

membership is primarily supported by a deracinated Europhile elite disconnected

from and distrustful of the public".



But he will add: "What is clear is that this is a terrible time to have the

diversion and uncertainty which build up to a referendum would entail."



Captions:



Vince Cable: 'Many in Europe would be happy to see the back of the UK'



