





In Riga a copper figure of Latvia's mythical maiden soars skyward holding three

golden stars. Nicknamed Milda, she stands at the top of the Freedom Monument,

symbolising the Baltic country's hard-won liberty and independence.



From next January Milda will become a more familiar face across Europe when her

likeness is stamped on to euros 1 and euros 2 coins to mark Latvia becoming the

18th member of a single currency zone which may, or may not, be emerging from a

three-year period of fighting for its life.



For Greece or Portugal, the euro may have seemed like a prison in recent years.

But for Latvia, or at least for its government and elite, the maiden-faced

currency will symbolise freedom and independence, reinforcing the vulnerable

small country's integration in the west and another big step in liberating

itself from its historical tormentor, Russia.



The European commission and the European Central Bank (ECB), in their

"convergence reports" last week, gave a green light to Latvia to join in

January. EU finance ministers are expected to rubber-stamp that decision next

month. This week the ratings agency Standard & Poor's responded by raising its

rating on the country's debt from BBB to BBB+, which is three levels above junk.



Estonia adopted the euro 30 months ago. Lithuania intends to follow suit in

2015. While a year or two ago the smart money was on the eurozone shrinking to

15, within a couple of years the likelihood is a membership of 19, plus a

campaign gearing up in Poland to take the club to 20.



For Valdis Dombrovskis, Latvia's prime minister, joining the euro makes economic

sense. It will bring budget savings, promote foreign direct investment and

underpin the recovery from an economic collapse in 2008-9 that foreshadowed

calamities to come elsewhere, especially in Ireland and Spain. But it's not all

finance and economics. For the Baltic states, long at the mercy of an imperial

Russia, whether tsarist or communist, and perennially wary of Vladimir Putin,

the euro is also political.



Dombrovskis agrees with Olli Rehn, the economics commissioner in Brussels who

when giving the green light stressed that Latvia would gain rather than forfeit

sovereignty by having a seat at the ECB and in the meetings of eurozone finance

ministers.



It might be an argument that would fall flat in Athens or Lisbon, but Latvia's

national currency, the lats, has been pegged to the euro for eight years -

meaning monetary policy has been effectively set in Frankfurt without Riga

having any say.



Nonetheless, opinion polls consistently show a majority against joining the

euro. Dombrovskis brushes aside opposition calls for a referendum, arguing that

the voters made their choice clear for Latvia's entering the EU in 2004 and the

entry terms included a commitment to joining the currency when the time was

right and criteria were met.



There is no doubt Latvia passes muster; indeed the economic data puts most

current eurozone countries to shame, Germany included. At just over 40% of gross

domestic product (GDP), the national debt is well below the eurozone's 60%

ceiling, while the budget deficit is a mere 1.2%, comfortably within the 3% rule

that in any case these days is honoured mainly in the breach.



Riga initially wanted to join in 2008 but was floored by the financial collapse

in the EU. The country of 2 million was the first in the EU to seek a bailout -

from Brussels and the International Monetary Fund - of euros 7.5bn (£6.4bn) when

a housing and consumption bubble, fuelled by cheap credit from the Swedish and

Danish banks that dominate the Baltic banking sector, burst and sent the economy

into a tailspin.



In 2008-9 the economy shrank by 25%, civil service jobs were slashed, wages cut,

social, education, and health services axed. Unemployment quadrupled; property

prices collapsed by up to 70%; an estimated 10% of the population, mainly young

people, emigrated.



In five years Latvia has been from boom to bust and, relatively speaking, back

to boom. The third poorest country in the EU, it is also the fastest growing,

notching up 5% growth last year.



Dombrovskis argues that the recovery is solid and sustainable, based on

manufacturing and exports and not the easy credit of the boom years of the last

decade. The European commission and the ECB appear to agree, but the latter in

particular is worried about Latvia being a potential money-laundering Trojan

horse within the eurozone. It points to the high level of foreign deposits in

Latvian banks, euros 10bn - half of their total deposits and worth 40% of GDP.



The deposits are overwhelmingly Russian, as Latvia is also a playground for

oligarchs and underworld figures who feel at home in a country where one in four

are ethnic Russians. The US state department has warned of "a systemic

money-laundering risk".



Similar concerns about Russian money played a large part in the recent Cyprus

disaster, but the scale of the problem is quite different. Bank deposits in

Cyprus amounted to eight times the country's GDP; in Latvia the equivalent

figure is 1.5.



Latvia's recovery from a collapse as steep as Greece's and its current status as

the EU's fastest growing economy has spurred talk that it is the model to follow

for stricken eurozone countries. But it seems very specific and very different

from the likes of Greece. Despite the savage austerity, the increase in poverty

and the collapse in living standards, there has been no social unrest.



Dombrovskis has achieved something no other eurozone leader has managed to pull

off, whether on the creditor or on the bailed-out side. He inflicted austerity

measures and spending cuts as tough as any in the eurozone without being forced

to do so by a "troika" of anonymous eurocrats and won re-election.



Captions:



The likeness of the mythical maiden from Riga's Freedom Monument will appear on

euros 1 and euros 2 coins from next year to mark Latvia joining the euro



