





Theresa May has burnished her rightwing credentials as a candidate for the

Conservative party leadership by suggesting that immigrants may be forced to pay

a cash bond if they want to travel to Britain.



As ministers jostle for position amid speculation that David Cameron could face

a leadership challenge this summer, the Daily Mail reported that May, the home

secretary, wants to impose a bond that would be refunded if immigrants do not

claim benefits.



The idea for the levy, which can be imposed on temporary immigrants under the

1999 Immigration and Asylum Act, was floated by the prime minister in a speech

in October 2011. Home Office sources told the Daily Mail the bond would be aimed

at "high-risk" individuals of "two or three nationalities".



Ministers are joking about how May is "on manoeuvres" as she prepares to

highlight her leadership credentials this weekend in a long-awaited speech to a

conference organised by the ConservativeHome website.



Her strategy is being likened to that of Sir John Major as he positioned himself

for the leadership in 1990. May will follow Major's example in making no attempt

to undermine the prime minister, but will be ready should a vacancy arise.



The Guardian reported at the weekend that rebel Tories were planning to write

letters to Graham Brady, the chairman of the backbench 1922 committee, if George

Osborne's budget on 20 March falls flat and if the Tories perform badly in May's

local elections. If 46 Tory MPs write to Brady, Cameron will face a leadership

contest.



May looked highly unamused when Labour leader Ed Miliband made light of her

ambitions at prime minister's questions after he taunted Cameron for asking him

questions. "All I can say is that it is good to see him preparing for

opposition," Miliband said. Turning to May, he added: "The home secretary shakes

her head. I am looking forward to facing her when they are in opposition."



May is being compared to Major because he was not associated with any particular

wing of the party, but was assiduous in courting the right, ensuring that he won

the support of Eurosceptics when Margaret Thatcher finally fell. The home

secretary has followed these tactics by regularly briefing rightwing newspapers

on her plans to distance Britain from the European Court of Human Rights. There

is one major difference between now and 1990: Thatcher's position was weak and

Cameron's position is relatively strong, although a significant group on the

right would like to replace him.



The speculation about May follows reports that Eurosceptic Tories are to step up

the pressure on Cameron by demanding that legislation to guarantee a referendum

on Britain's EU membership is passed before the election.



Today's Times reported that an early referendum was discussed at a private

dinner attended by Chris Grayling, the justice secretary, Liam Fox, the former

defence secretary, and David Davis, the former shadow home secretary.



Captions:



Theresa May's tactics have been compared to those adopted by Sir John Major

before he became prime minister in 1990



