





Labour plans to require firms hiring skilled foreign labour to also provide

local apprenticeships were challenged last night when business rejected the

idea, and the party conceded that the apprenticeships would have to be offered

to all EU workers.



In one of its big policy announcements of the conference, Labour said large

firms would have to train an apprentice if they wished to hire a skilled worker

from outside the EU. But the British Chambers of Commerce and CBI condemned the

proposals as adding more red tape. Some Labour frontbench members were shocked

that greater effort had not been made to convince business leaders in advance.



Some Labour figures involved in framing the apprenticeship policy did not appear

to have been consulted.



The advance publicity suggested "a Brit job for each foreign worker hired".

Miliband was himself quoted as saying: "Any firm that wants to bring in a

foreign worker from outside the EU will also have to train up someone who is a

local worker." But Labour internal briefings had made clear that the

apprenticeships would have to be available to anyone in the EU.



The policy has been in preparation for months and the party said it would be

included in a Labour government's immigration bill in the first term of

parliament.



However Alan Milburn, a former cabinet minister, said he was "worried" about

Labour's stance on immigration. He said he fears the party is "conniving" with

the Tories and Liberal Democrats to limit the number of foreigners coming into

the country. Britain needs more, not less, immigration to deal with the demands

of an ageing society, he said.



The Tory business minister Matthew Hancock said the scheme was unravelling and

illegal. To meet European rules on free movement of labour, the Tories said,

Miliband's policy would have to require companies to take on an EU national

apprentice, rather than a UK national, for every non-EU worker hired.



But Labour's immigration spokesman, Chris Bryant, said Hancock was wrong to

suggest the apprenticeship policy would be unlawful. The posts would be

available to anyone from the European Economic Area (EEA) - the EU, Iceland,

Liechtenstein and Norway - but in practice were likely to go to UK applicants.

Labour said the number of Germans or Bulgarians who would take up the offer of a

UK apprenticeship was minimal.



John Longworth, director general of the British Chambers of Commerce, condemned

the scheme as an "apprentice tax" on employers and on job creation. "It serves

neither to control immigration, where we should have a points system linked more

strongly to economic benefit, nor young people, who should be encouraged and

properly supported rather than being used to control immigration by other means.



"Businesses need to be able to choose the talents and resource they need, and

sometimes cannot find in the UK. This immigration benefits Britain. Penalising

good companies by making the grant of a work permit conditional on taking on a

UK apprentice just raises business costs and new red tape. There are far better

ways to support employers to take on and train our young people."



Miliband has highlighted a series of policies designed to provide greater

security for workers, including action on zero-hours contracts, and an increase

in the maximum fine from £5,000 to £50,000 for paying below the minimum wage, as

well as new powers for councils to enforce the minimum wage. No company was

prosecuted for underpaying between 1998 and 2007, and the shadow home secretary

said there had to be more prosecutions.



Labour has also set up a review to look into how the minimum wage can regain its

lost value, but put no figure on the necessary rise, or any timetable. Similar

proposals were announced by Vince Cable, the business secretary, last week.



In his interview on the BBC's Andrew Marr programme Miliband ruled out an early

commitment to hold a referendum on British membership of the EU, but left open

the possibility of changing his stance before the election. "We set out a very,

very clear position on this but we will set out our position at the election,"

he said.



Last night, the shadow foreign secretary Douglas Alexander, acknowledged there

were splits in the shadow cabinet over a referendum, but that it was more an

issue of "refreshing consent rather than securing exit". He told a fringe

meeting: "I am not for a moment pretending there are not some who have suggested

we should countenance a referendum. But I would argue that those people within

Labour who argue for a referendum overwhelmingly see it as a means of refreshing

consent rather than securing exit."



Miliband told Marr that Labour would not build any more free schools and prevent

existing ones from expanding. But he said he would not close "good schools".



Miliband will also announce fresh plans to clamp down on profiteering energy

companies and a major housebuilding programme.



Captions:



Backstage deal



Labour leader Ed Miliband chats with the shadow chancellor, Ed Balls, and shadow

chief secretary to the Treasury, Rachel Reeves, during the first day of Labour's

conference Photograph: Stefan Rousseau



