





Downing Street has been laughing off a series of jibes from grandees ahead of

David Cameron's speech on Europe on the grounds that few have had the ear of

prime ministers and presidents in recent years.



No 10 may find it less easy to dismiss an intervention by a new recruit to the

grandees' club who, until last year, was at the heart of Britain's transatlantic

relationship for more than a decade.



If Tony Blair's famous Atlantic bridge, in which Britain serves as a link

between Europe and the US, ever took human form then Sir Nigel Sheinwald carried

quite a burden as British ambassador to the EU and Washington. Bearing the

scars, or colours, from 10 years on the transatlantic bridge Sheinwald delivers

one key message before the prime minister's long-awaited speech on Europe on

Friday. Britain will diminish its influence in the US if it raises questions

about its commitment to the EU, let alone leaves it altogether.



"A Britain on the sidelines of Europe, even more out of Europe, would not be in

the American interest and would not be in the interest of other major European

partners," Sheinwald told the Guardian from New York yesterday.



The remarks are a significant contribution to the debate because they echo,

almost word for word, a warning by the Obama administration of the dangers in

Cameron's strategy to be outlined in the Netherlands on Friday. Philip Gordon,

the US assistant secretary of state, questioned the prime minister's plans for a

referendum and said that "a strong British voice" in the EU was "in the American

interest".



Sheinwald said he was not in the slightest bit surprised by the US intervention

which was the result of a "conscious decision". Eurosceptics, who dismissed the

remarks by Gordon, will now have to contend with the views of the man who eased

the path for Cameron's successful trip to Washington last March. This took place

two months after Sheinwald retired as ambassador to Washington after a five-year

stint that followed seven years at the heart of EU policy, as Britain's

"permanent representative" in Brussels between 2000-03 and as Tony Blair's main

European adviser between 2003-07.



One of the most arduous tasks of the "perm reps" is to attend the weekly

meetings of all 27 ambassadors to the EU, which gave Sheinwald an insight into

the possibilities - and limitations - of EU negotiations. The prime minister is

expected to pledge to hold a referendum on a "new settlement" in Britain's place

in the EU if he wins the next general election. Cameron would use Britain's veto

in a major revision of the Lisbon treaty, designed to underpin new governance

arrangements for the eurozone after the 2014 European parliamentary elections,

to demand a repatriation of powers.



Sheinwald says Cameron should not assume there will be a big-bang treaty

renegotiation that will enable him to table extensive demands for the

repatriation of British powers. "I still don't believe that that process is

going to be anything other than a slow, difficult and gradual one given the

complexity of the issues."



In his lengthy Foreign Office career Sheinwald, 59, witnessed the painful birth

of the greatest example of European integration which is at the heart of the

continent's current pain. He takes issue with one of the prime minister's

central calculations about the euro which is informing No 10's entire European

strategy - that the "remorseless logic" of monetary union will lead to a fiscal

union which Britain should encourage but not join. It is in those negotiations

that the prime minister hopes to repatriate powers.



"I am not disagreeing that there is a remorseless logic about further

integration," Sheinwald says. "What I am arguing about is the matter of degree -

the sense that it is in our interests to make them as separate as possible from

us is where I would part company from the viewpoint."



Sheinwald laughs as he sympathises with Lord Kerr of Kinlochard, one of the few

people also to have served as ambassador to Washington and the EU, who warned in

the Guardian last month that the prime minister is in danger of leaving the EU

by accident.



"Whether that would be the be all and end all - or whether as in Ireland or in

Denmark you would have a re-run of the referendum - who knows? But it would

create a major crisis in the British relationship with the rest of EU."



Captions:



'Britain on the sidelines, would not be in the US interests and not in the

interests of major EU partners '



Nigel Sheinwald



