





&#10002;So many are nervous about the prospects for fracking in Britain. What is

the potential, what are the dangers? Difficult choices, but none of this seems

to be keeping energy minister Michael Fallon awake at night. He seems to be

quite enjoying everyone else's agony.



Two months ago he was joking about the prospects for fracking in the south-east,

suggesting quite a few "rectory walls" might bear the brunt. More recently he

was to be found undermining once again PM Dave's claim to run the greenest

government ever. When Fallon, speaking at a party conference fringe meeting,

mentioned the UK's "strong environmental and climate change commitments", a

heckler shouted: "Scrap them!" To which Fallon quietly replied: "It would be my

luck to scrap them." Which raises the question, is this the sort of thing he

says when he meets Cuadrilla, the fracking company? Hard to tell, and there is

no point asking his department. Responding to a freedom of information request,

the Department of Energy said it "can confirm that Mr Fallon met Cuadrilla on 24

June 2013". But it can't confirm anything that was said because "there is no

recorded note of the meeting". Seems a strange way to deal with a matter quite

so sensitive. But he probably cracked more jokes, as is his way.



&#10002;More bloodletting in the Tory party as the stalking horse that never

was, Adam Afriyie, breaks cover again to cause PM Dave discomfort by calling for

an early EU referendum. This provokes much angst and a measure of backbiting

among honourable members, each of them figures of high principle. Take Philip

Davies, the Tory MP for Shipley. He's one of our favourites as you know, as

parliamentary spokesman for the Campaign Against Political Correctness and the

man who wonders why anyone complains when white performers black up. According

to the Sun, one of his favourite mouthpieces, he's taking a sensible approach to

Afriyie's latest intervention. Davies, said the paper, criticised Afriyie, but

also admitted he could support him. "I think he's being utterly self-indulgent

and trying to boost a leadership bid." Nevertheless, "I believe in a referendum

so I'm not saying I won't vote for it." This is why he is so dear to the good

folk of Shipley.



&#10002;Another firm diary favourite, Dr Liam Fox, also finds himself harshly

spotlighted. Hard hearts let it be known to the scurrilous press that the

potential party leader claimed 3p on his expenses for a 100-metre car trip.

Extraordinary that such an event should occur, especially as he once boasted to

author Dominic Shelmerdine that, unlike his colleagues, his medical training

bestowed upon him "a sense of perspective, something that is sadly all too

lacking in politics". A beacon indeed. Would that they all could see the world

like him.



&#10002;One never tires of a literary feud, and luckily there seems to be an

endless supply. Generating both heat and light of late, the fisticuffs between

Salman Rushdie and the American Jonathan Franzen. "Franzen has recently attacked

you for using Twitter," said the French magazine Le Nouvel Observateur, in

conversation with the great man. "I feel like I've been bitten by a mosquito,"

replied a waspish Rushdie. "No, seriously, he's a very good writer. But I think

he should mind his own business. Of course he has every right not to appreciate

social networks. If he doesn't want to use Twitter, that's his affair. But let

him not come and tell me what I ought to be doing!" Salman has been pushed

around enough for one life, it seems.



&#10002;Interesting times, finally, for Jon Benjamin, the British ambassador to

Chile. A lot on his diplomatic plate, including the country's role combatting

climate change, opening the channels for British business, and bolstering our

steadfast attitude towards the Falklands. And then for Our Man in Chile, there

was that bilateral meeting with the black-eyed biter of bat's heads, Ozzy

Osbourne. Benjamin has been tweeting about it and parading the picture. "How to

sum up a Black Sabbath gig in one word," he says. "LOUD! But a conversation with

Ozzy - not loud." Heroes fall short in all sorts of ways.



diary@theguardian.com



Twitter: @hugh-muir



