





Britain's standing as a leading military power with the ability to influence

events beyond its own borders will be jeopardised if the country leaves the

European Union, the German minister of defence has warned.



In an interview with the Guardian, Thomas de Maiziere insisted the defence

implications for Britain, Europe and Nato would be profound, and said this was

an aspect of the argument David Cameron did not appear to have recognised.



"This is not mentioned by David Cameron in our discussions, but for us

especially, it is important," said De Maiziere, who is a close political ally of

the German chancellor, Angela Merkel.



"If Great Britain leaves the EU, it would be a great disappointment to us. It

would weaken Nato, it would weaken the British influence within Nato. I think

from a military point of view the disadvantages for Great Britain would be

bigger than the advantages."



De Maiziere said he knew he was intervening in a domestic debate, but argued it

was too important to stand to one side, particularly with the potential military

consequences for the UK's standing in the world.



"I am not talking about economic issues or social issues, or whether you drive

on the left or the right side of the road, I am talking about security. I am

talking about British influence beyond its own borders. I think it is part of

the British tradition that Britain has to play a role in the world. Outside the

EU it would not lose a role, but it would reduce their own influence and this

cannot be in the interests of Great Britain.



"We in Germany would lose a strong partner for a pro-Atlantic co-operation with

America and a pragmatic British way to deal with security issues."



Under pressure from Eurosceptics in his own party, and with Ukip support

growing, Cameron has promised a simple in-out referendum on membership of the EU

if the Conservatives win the next election.



During the announcement in January, the prime minister warned that

disillusionment with the EU was at an "all-time high", and said he wanted to

renegotiate Britain's role in the EU before he could pledge his support for

staying in. Germany and France have said the UK cannot cherrypick its

membership, and De Maiziere made it clear that Berlin needed strong UK support

within the EU to counter French hopes of weakening Nato at the expense of

Brussels.



"France has asked us to take more lead within the EU on defence. France is not

in favour of a stronger role for Nato. The UK is just the opposite," he said.



Germany has also been irked by public demands from the UK and the US for Berlin

to spend more money on its military, to bolster Nato's defences at a time when

Washington has made Asia its priority.



De Maiziere, 59, made it clear he was not minded to take advice from countries

that were cutting their defence budgets; the UK slashed defence spending by 8%

in the 2010 strategic defence and security review (SDSR), which led to 60,000

civilian and military job losses, and the loss of equipment such as the aircraft

carrier Ark Royal and the entire fleet of Harrier jump jets.



"For the last five years, the German defence budget has been quite stable.

Nearly no reduction, and in the future it will remain stable. This is nearly

unique in Europe," he said. "Of the bigger countries, only Poland is in a

similar position. I see reductions in Great Britain and France. I am not

criticising that. There are good reasons for that. But if we keep the line, and

they don't, I would like to learn the (reasons why) you hear sometimes we should

have more commitments than they themselves. I am speaking frankly."



De Maiziere said other European countries looked to Germany to take a lead in

economic and military matters, but then balked at the way Berlin wanted to do

things. "In the euro (banking) crisis, when some countries call for German

leadership, they mean Germany should pay more. They criticise us when we say

leadership means we, Europe, shouldn't spend so much raising debts. But when we

say this, they say this perhaps is not good leadership. You can't have the cake

and eat it. When the leader only fulfils the wishes of the others, that is not

leadership."



He made clear that Germany had been urging Nato to adopt a counter-insurgency

strategy in Afghanistan long before it was finally adopted, but had been sneered

at for suggesting the military approach could not work on its own.



EU crime opt-out 'puts Britain's security at risk', page 8



