





David Cameron's long-serving deputy whip, John Randall, and his youngest

minister, Chloe Smith, have resigned ahead of a reshuffle in which the prime

minister is expected to promote a number of women.



Downing Street made the surprise announcements late last night, sparking

speculation that Cameron will shake up junior roles within his team as early as

today. They follow the resignation of transport minister Simon Burns, who wants

to stand as deputy Commons speaker.



Randall, who has served in the Tory whips' office for 13 years, said he informed

the prime minister last year that he wanted to return to the backbenches. He is

best known for his role in the resignation of his boss, Andrew Mitchell, the

former chief whip, over the "plebgate" scandal just over a year ago.



In his resignation letter, Randall assured the prime minister that he would

continue to do "whatever I can for you personally as well as for the party, the

government and of course the country".



"I know that it is customary to write at these times that it has been a great

privilege and honour to serve as a member of the government, but it really has

been that and a lot more," he wrote.



Cameron's reply to Randall was glowing, describing him as a "rock" for the

whips' office and the party. "It sounds dramatic, but I had rather hoped this

day would never come," Cameron wrote. "I could not have wished for a more loyal,

discreet, patient, trustworthy and committed colleague over the last eight

years."



Smith, a Cabinet Office minister, is stepping down to concentrate on her

constituency work and engaging young people in politics. The 31-year-old MP, who

has previously served as a whip and a Treasury minister, has recently been

overseeing the lobbying bill, which has been criticised as posing a potential

threat to freedom of speech. She was moved from the Treasury in the last

reshuffle after a difficult interview on BBC Newsnight about the chancellor's

deferral of fuel duty.



Last night, Smith, the MP for Norwich North, told the Guardian: "It's entirely

my own decision and something I see as very positive. Anyone who has known me

and my work has known that my constituency comes first. I've spent three of my

four years serving as a minister. I'm very proud of that and achieving things

like helping to save £10bn pounds of Whitehall waste. But for now I want to

focus on the things that really matter to me."



In her letter to Cameron, she said: "As you know, I was only 27 when I was lucky

enough to be elected as an MP. I would welcome the opportunity to develop other

ways of giving public service, both inside and outside parliament, while

continuing to work hard for my constituents."



The prime minister's reply said Smith has served "ably" and made a "positive

impact". "I know this will not have been an easy decision for you to make, and

one you will have given a huge amount of thought to," he said. "After serving

the government so ably for over three years, you will certainly be missed, but I

completely understand and respect your decision."



The Tory reshuffle could happen at the same time as Ed Miliband shakes up the

Labour frontbench. He is thought to be considering moving Andy Burnham, the

health secretary, and Liam Byrne, the work and pensions secretary, with Rachel

Reeves, a Treasury minister, tipped for promotion.



The news came at the end of an embarrassing day for the Tories, as a rebel plot

to force Cameron to hold an EU referendum next year was rejected by most

Conservatives. Adam Afriyie, the Conservative MP for Windsor, called for a vote

on Britain's membership of the European Union next October, pre-empting the

official Tory promise of a poll before the end of 2017. Afriyie, who was

rumoured to be behind a plan to oust the prime minister earlier this year, said

he would not be able to sleep at night if the public were not given a say on the

issue before the election. He was planning to table an amendment to the EU

referendum bill, which is supported by the Tory leadership.



But within hours, it became clear that he had hit the wrong note, as some of the

most eurosceptic MPs in the party pleaded with him to reconsider his position

for the sake of unity. The only vocal supporter was Tom Watson, the Labour

backbencher, who said he would probably vote with Afriyie. "I think there are a

lot of people who think we need clarity on this now," he said.



Captions:



'It's my own decision. For now I want to focus on the things that really matter

to me'



Chloe Smith



'It has been a great privilege and honour to serve as a member of the

government, and a lot more'



John Randall



