





Fears that bank accounts could be raided in any future eurozone bailouts spooked

markets yesterday, as Cypriots prepared for their banks to reopen on Thursday

for the first time in over a week following a deal to secure a euros 10bn

lifeline.



Markets took fright after the head of the group of eurozone finance ministers

indicated that the Cyprus rescue could be a template for similar situations.

Cyprus is the first of five bailouts in the eurozone where depositors have been

hit.



"What we've done last night is what I call pushing back the risks," Jeroen

Dijsselbloem, the Dutch finance minister, told Reuters and the Financial Times

after clinching an agreement for Cyprus. "If the bank can't do it, then we'll

talk to the shareholders and the bondholders, we'll ask them to contribute in

recapitalising the bank, and if necessary the uninsured deposit holders," he

said.



Bank of Cyprus and Laiki, the two largest domestic banks, will remain shut until

Thursday while the latter is split into a good and bad bank and a levy - of

potentially 40% - is imposed on accounts of more than euros 100,000.



A big percentage of those deposits belong to Russians. Yesterday the Russian

president, Vladimir Putin, said there would be a deal to rework the terms of a

euros 2.5bn loan to the Mediterranean island, which had become attractive for

its low tax regime and lax vetting laws.



Cyprus president Nicos Anastasiades made a televised address in which he

admitted that measures would be in place to stop money pouring out of the banks

when they reopen. "The central bank will implement capital controls on

transactions. I want to assure you that this will be a very temporary measure

that will gradually be relaxed," he said.



Markets were initially buoyed by news of the "painful" bailout for Cyprus,

clinched late on Sunday night following threats by the European Central Bank to

switch off liquidity to Cypriot banks, which, carried by international deposits,

had grown to eight times the euros 17bn economy.



But markets reacted badly later in the day after Dijsselbloem's remarks. As

markets tumbled, he issued a clarification insisting that bailout programmes

were "tailor-made" and that "no models or templates are used".



Nevertheless, all markets erased their early gains to close down on the day. The

FTSE 100 index lost 0.2% and the German stock market fell 0.5%. Bank shares fell

across Europe while the euro, which had nudged up through $1.30 initially, fell

back to below $1.29. US markets, which had largely shrugged off the Cypriot

problem, were also lower, with the Dow Jones Industrial Average down over 70

points, 0.5%.



Cypriots had reacted to the agreement with European leaders with relief as it

appeared that at least deposits below euros 100,000 had been spared the levy.



In the streets and cafes of Nicosia, and on TV chat shows, the feeling was that

the country had been saved but at a price.



Interior minister Sokratis Hasiko encapsulated the mood, describing the EU

-IMF-backed bailout as the best of a bad range of choices. "We had got to the

point where we were discussing a (depositor) haircut of between 50 and 60%," he

said, adding that the Cypriot parliament's rejection of the first accord, with

its highly controversial levy on depositors big and small, had been hugely

negative for the country's banks. "So this is the best we could get."



There were warnings the impact could reach beyond Cyprus, particularly with

repercussions from Russia, where the prime minister, Dmitry Medvedev, said:

"They are continuing to steal what has already been stolen." This was a phrase

Lenin used to answer the allegation that the Bolsheviks were thieves. Russian

officials have repeatedly compared the Cypriot bank levy to Soviet-era

expropriation.



"For sure there is anger," said Marios Cosma, head of K Treppides, a firm that

serves international clients, mainly rich Russians. "For the first time in

Europe, you have a situation where depositors are being called to 'bail in'."



While Cyprus' banking sector has exploded, other countries have even larger

banking sectors relative to GDP. Malta's and Luxembourg's banking sectors are

relatively larger, more than 20 times' GDP in the case of Luxembourg. Malta's

finance minister wrote an article in the Malta Times expressing concern about

what would happen if it encounters similar problems in the eurozone.



In Cyprus there were calls for a referendum on the bailout package. "It is

illegal and undemocratic," said Christos Tombazos, general secretary of the

Pancyprian Federation of Labour.



The Bank of Cyprus is 9.7% owned by Dmitry Rybolovlev, a Russian based in Monaco

whose wealth is estimated at $9.1bn according to Forbes.



One Russian oligarch, Alexander Lebedev, played down the amount he stood to lose

in Cyprus as no more than $10,000. "It's not worth talking about," he said.



Captions:



Reality check



Students take part in a parade for Greek independence day in Nicosia, yesterday.

Politicians described the bailout deal as a painful solution to avert imminent

bankruptcy



Photograph: Petros Giannakouris/AP



