





David Cameron is to table his own draft bill introducing an in-out EU referendum

in an attempt to douse the Eurosceptic surge within the Conservative party and

in the face of a doubling of support for Ukip in a new Guardian/ICM poll.



The poll findings, showing Ukip on a record high in an ICM poll of 18%, will

further unsettle backbenchers demanding that Cameron tackle the voters' lack of

trust over Europe and commit to legislation in this parliament for a referendum

in 2017.



The poll shows that support for the three main parties has drained away to Ukip,

with each of them down four points on last month - Labour dropping to 34%, the

Tories 28%, and the Liberal Democrats 11% - as Nigel Farage's party gained nine

points. For all three established parties to be falling back in the polls at the

same time is unprecedented in the 29-year history of the Guardian/ICM series.

The Tories are plumbing depths they have not experienced in more than a decade.



The Conservatives had previously promised to publish an EU referendum bill. But

yesterday on Cameron's visit to Washington, and in an attempt to respond to

growing backbench clamour, Downing Street said that the prime minister was

prepared to offer formal Tory backing for a private member's bill that would

guarantee a referendum.



A draft referendum bill will be published this morning and Number 10 indicated

that the prime minister would try to get it debated in parliament by allowing a

backbencher to table it. A government parliamentary bill cannot be introduced in

the face of Lib Dem opposition. But a private member's bill will often fail for

lack of time as in practice it is relatively easy for a small group of

backbenchers to use parliamentary procedure to talk it out.



A senior Tory spokesman said last night: "The prime minister has said he wants

to explore ways in which he can make sure that (referendum) commitment is

strengthened. So tomorrow the Conservative party will publish a draft bill to

legislate for an in-out referendum by the end of 2017. We will examine all

opportunities to bring this bill before parliament, including as a private

member's bill."



Earlier yesterday Cameron - in danger of looking as weak as John Major at the

height of the Maastricht crisis - took comfort from the broad endorsement of his

European strategy by Barack Obama at a joint White House Press conference.



The US president first described Britain's EU membership as an "expression of

its influence" around the world, but then offered measured praise for the prime

minister's plan to renegotiate Britain's EU membership terms after the next

election. He said: "You probably want to see if you can fix what is broken in a

very important relationship before you break it off - that makes some sense to

me."



But Obama said he would wait to see if the negotiations succeeded before making

a final judgment, and repeatedly stressed the need for the UK to be engaged.



Cameron acted after it became clear that as many as 80 Tory MPs had signed an

amendment, due to be debated tomorrow, regretting the absence of a referendum

bill in the Queen's Speech. In an admission of weakness Tory whips agreed that

parliamentary private secretaries, the lowest rung of the government ladder,

would have a free vote. Ministers have been told they must abstain or vote

against.



The Guardian/ICM poll is remarkable because barring a single month in 2002, the

Conservatives have not dropped below 28% since Tony Blair's long honeymoon in

1997-98.



The Lib Dems have not fallen below today's 11% in the series since September of

1997, the immediate aftermath of Blair's first victory.



Labour's 34% score is its lowest since the immediate aftermath of Gordon Brown's

ejection from power, in July 2010.



The poll also shows that there is a clear "Farage factor" in the personal

leadership ratings. Last month voters were split down the middle on his

performance with 28% saying Nigel Farage, the Ukip leader, was doing a good job,

and 29% a bad job, giving a net negative score of -1. Today, the balance of

opinion is running 40%:23% in his favour, a net positive of +17.



Last night Farage described the Conservative proposal as "a sticking plaster to

paste the cracks of a divided party."



A senior Lib Dem source told the Press Association that the party was

"nonplussed" about news of the bill and that the issue of legislation on a

referendum was not discussed during negotiations on the Queen's Speech.



Douglas Alexander, Labour's shadow foreign secretary, described it as "the

latest panicked response from the Prime Minister who is now following, rather

than leading his backbenchers".



Cameron has been infuriated by cabinet ministers Michael Gove and Philip Hammond

saying on Sunday they would leave the EU if there was a referendum now. "There

isn't going to be a referendum tomorrow so it is a hypothetical question,"

Cameron said yesterday. He accused those predicting he will secure only

inconsequential concessions from Brussels of "throwing in the towel".



Captions:



The three main parties are down four points in the latest Guardian/ICM poll,

with Ukip picking up nine points to reach 18%



