





David Cameron's leadership will be in crisis if the Conservatives come third in

the Eastleigh byelection today behind the Liberal Democrats and Ukip, the

rightwing Tory David Davis warned yesterday.



His remarks, before the critical by-election for the coalition partners, reflect

Conservative concern that the main route to an overall majority at the next

election will be blocked if Tories cannot capture a string of Liberal Democrat

seats.



Eleven of the Tories' top 43 target seats are held by the Lib Dems, and senior

Conservatives are preparing for a bitter inquest if they fail to capture

Eastleigh.



Davis said: "I think if we came third it would be a crisis, I think that's the

case, and if it's a close second with Ukip on our tail it will also be

uncomfortable."



He insisted neither result would dislodge Cameron. "He's going to be there till

the next election, but the simple truth is that it will make things more

uncomfortable in the House of Commons."



Nick Clegg, campaigning in Eastleigh, insisted the Lib Dems were on the "cusp of

a great, great victory" for their candidate, local councillor Mike Thornton.



Speaking to party loyalists at the Lib Dems' headquarters on a trading estate

yesterday evening, Clegg said it was one of the most closely contested

byelections that he could remember but he believed that his party could squeeze

home.



Conservative chances were boosted by the backdrop of the resignation of the

former MP Chris Huhne and the media controversy over Clegg's handling of

allegations of sexual misdemeanours by Lord Rennard, the party's former chief

executive. Yesterday Clegg was forced to admit that Rennard's resignation in

2009 was not purely on health grounds, but against a backdrop of allegations

about sexual harassment.



The seat is the Tories' 55th most marginal target seat, requiring a 3.3% swing.

But senior Tory sources acknowledged it was highly unlikely they would win in

Eastleigh, saying the Rennard issue had not resonated with the public.



Confidence was expressed that the Tories' candidate, Maria Hutchings, who has

fought a troubled campaign, could see off a last-minute push by Ukip.



But with some betting sites putting Ukip at evens to win, Nigel Farage, the

party's leader, said he would be disappointed if the Ukip candidate only came

third.



Campaigning in the constituency for a seventh time, Farage hardened the party's

line on immigration by suggesting that an influx of Romanians and Bulgarians

next year could lead to a surge in crime.



Pointing to Office for National Statistics figures published this week showing

the number of Romanians arrested over the past five years in London, Farage

said: "I think this highlights even more strongly than in the terms we set out

to begin with why people should use this byelection as an opportunity to send a

shattering message to the coalition that we do not want total open-door

immigration to Romania and Bulgaria."



On his party's chances, he said: "We're excited. If Cameron loses it's a

disaster, if Clegg loses it's a catastrophe. Us losing doesn't do us a lot of

harm, us winning will break the dam."



The Ukip candidate, Diane James, said she believed she could send shockwaves

through the political establishment.



Davis, who contested the Tory leadership with Cameron in 2005, suggested the

Tory right would pump up the pressure for a different economic strategy in the

budget next month.



He said the cuts programme needed to be fiercer. "We've had a lot of rhetoric

about austerity; we need a bit more reality about it. We need more cuts I'm

afraid, or at least those same cuts faster."



He added the route to growth lay through lower taxes.



Labour is preparing for its candidate, the writer John O'Farrell, to come fourth

in what may be seen as a rebuff for Ed Miliband's one nation message.



Shadow cabinet members who have been in Eastleigh say immigration was an issue

on the doorstep. Miliband has already made two speeches on immigration since he

became leader and a third is in the pipeline. Cameron has attempted to stave off

a Ukip surge both by promising a referendum on the EU after the general

election, and by hinting at restricting EU migrants' access to benefits.



