





David Cameron will today set a deadline to hold an in-out referendum on

Britain's membership of the European Union by the end of 2017 as he hardens his

position on the issue that has bedevilled Tory leaders for a quarter of a

century.



To the delight of Eurosceptics, the prime minister will throw down the gauntlet

to his fellow EU leaders to agree to a revision of Britain's membership terms

within two and a half years of the next general election or risk triggering a

British exit.



In his long-awaited speech on Europe, which has been repeatedly delayed since

the autumn, Cameron will pledge no rest until he wins because democratic consent

for the EU in Britain is "wafer thin".



The prime minister will say: "The next Conservative manifesto in 2015 will ask

for a mandate from the British people for a Conservative government to negotiate

a new settlement with our European partners in the next parliament.



And when we have negotiated that new settlement, we will give the British people

a referendum with a very simple in or out choice to stay in the EU on these new

terms; or come out altogether. It will be an in-out referendum.



"Legislation will be drafted before the next election. And if a Conservative

government is elected we will introduce the enabling legislation immediately and

pass it by the end of that year. And we will complete this negotiation and hold

this referendum within the first half of the next parliament.



"It is time for the British people to have their say. It is time to settle this

European question in British politics."



Last night, Labour leader Ed Miliband said Cameron's speech would "define him as

a weak prime minister, being driven by his party, not by the national economic

interest".



Prominent pro-Europeans are planning to lambast Cameron for placing a question

mark over Britain's EU membership. One senior figure said: "This is dynamite.

This is such a risk - it is an all or nothing strategy."



The prime minister's pledge to hold an in-out referendum on a relatively short

timetable is the "red meat" which has prompted prominent Eurosceptics, such as

the former defence secretary Liam Fox, to express satisfaction with the speech.



No 10 insists the prime minister is not adopting hostile tactics towards the EU,

although some pro-Europeans suggested that Cameron had crossed a line by

appearing to use the threat of a referendum within a relatively short timetable

to strengthen Britain's hand in the negotiations.



Cameron will make clear to his 26 fellow EU leaders that a failure to offer

Britain a referendum on new membership terms would increase the chance of a

British exit. "The question mark is already there and ignoring it won't make it

go away," he will say. "In fact, quite the reverse. Those who refuse to

contemplate consulting the British people, would in my view make more likely our

eventual exit."



Nick Clegg, who has been briefed by the prime minister on the speech, will

reject Cameron's pledge to hold a referendum by 2017 on the grounds that it is

wrong to commit Britain to such a specific timetable when there is uncertainty

over whether negotiations will take place. The deputy prime minister's

opposition means that the draft legislation for the referendum will have to be

drawn up by Conservative special advisers outside the formal government and

parliamentary routes.



The prime minister's plans, which will involve tabling new British membership

terms in a future EU treaty negotiation designed to agree new eurozone

governance structures, may have run into trouble even before he delivers his

speech. Angela Merkel and Francois Hollande agreed at a summit in Berlin

yesterday to publish joint proposals for the running of the eurozone at an EU

summit in June.



The move by the leaders of Germany and France means negotiations could take

place earlier than No 10 had expected. The prime minister will be unable to

table his demands for the repatriation of powers before the next election

because Clegg has dismissed this strategy as "a false promise wrapped in a union

jack".



The Franco-German timetable also raises the prospect that the negotiations could

take place outside a formal EU treaty revision. German sources have indicated in

recent weeks that Merkel has abandoned plans for the moment to demand a revision

of the Lisbon treaty in the face of strong opposition across the EU,

particularly from Paris.



The PM, who has briefed Hollande and Merkel on his speech, is understood to have

accepted that he may have to table his demands outside a formal treaty

negotiation. This raises the prospect that he could follow in the footsteps of

Harold Wilson who negotiated small changes to Britain's EU membership terms

outside the treaties ahead of the 1975 referendum.



Cameron will make clear in his speech that he will be demanding major changes,

possibly including the repatriation of social and employment laws which could

see Britain winning a complete opt-out from the working time directive. Downing

Street sources have suggested that work is now complete on plans by Theresa May,

the home secretary, to restrict benefits to EU citizens who are entitled to

settle in Britain.



Downing Street insists the prime minister's goal is to strengthen Britain's

position in the EU by winning greater support through renegotiated membership

terms. But he will indicate that he may countenance a campaign for a no vote, if

he fails to win his demands, when he says the status quo is unacceptable.



