





What she said "My government's first priority is to strengthen Britain's

economic competitiveness. My ministers will continue to prioritise measures that

reduce the deficit - ensuring interest rates are kept low for homeowners and

businesses."



What it means Deficit reduction gets a lower profile than it did in the speeches

in 2010 and in 2012. In both those years, it was in the second sentence in the

speech, and described as the government's first priority. But, with borrowing

essentially flat rather than going down, a comment like that was probably deemed

a bit embarrassing.



What she said "A bill will be introduced to reduce the burden of excessive

regulation on businesses. A further bill will make it easier for businesses to

protect their intellectual property. A draft bill will be published establishing

a simple set of consumer rights."



What it means A deregulation bill enacts some measures that emerged from the

government's "red tape challenge", including exempting from health and safety

legislation self-employed people whose work poses no threat to others. An

intellectual property bill will make stealing registered designs and selling

counterfeit products for profit a criminal offence punishable by up to 10 years

in prison. A draft consumer rights bill will ensure that consumer law applies to

the purchase of digital content.



What she said "Legislation will be introduced to enable the building of the High

Speed Two railway line, providing further opportunities for economic growth in

many of Britain's cities. My government will continue with legislation to update

energy infrastructure."



What it means There are actually two high speed rail bills: one, the high speed

rail (preparation) bill, providing the funding for the scheme, and a second, an

HS2 hybrid bill, allowing the project to go ahead. This is one of the few bills

unpopular on the Tory backbenches to get a mention. The energy bill, which will

encourage private investment in the energy sector, is one of several measures

being "carried over" under a procedure used increasingly regularly.



What she said "To make sure that every child has the best start in life,

regardless of background, further measures will be taken to improve the quality

of education for young people."



What it means This is the Michael Gove section of the speech, referring to

school reforms that are already in the pipeline. There is no new legislation

planned in this field, although some of the measures relating to childcare are

included in the children and families bill, another carry over measure.



What she said "My government will bring forward legislation to create a simpler

state pension system that encourages saving and provides more help to those who

have spent years caring for children."



What it means The pensions bill will introduce a single-tier pension scheme, and

increase the state pension age to 67. This is a central part of the government's

pitch to women, who are polling badly for the Tories.



What she said "Legislation will be introduced to reform the way long-term care

is paid for, to ensure the elderly do not have to sell their homes to meet their

care bills."



What it means This is the first major piece of legislation to get a mention in

the speech - the care bill. It will implement the proposals that were put

forward by the government following the Dilnot review capping the amount people

pay towards their elderly care.



What she said "My government will bring forward a bill that further reforms

Britain's immigration system."



What it means The immigration bill is the third big piece of legislation in the

speech, which has been well trailed in advance and read as a response to the

threat from Ukip. The legislation will restrict EU migrants' access to

jobseeker's allowance to six months, issue new guidance to local authorities to

give priority to local people in social housing, and place new responsibilities

on EU member states to pay if their citizens use the NHS.



What she said "My lords and members of the House of Commons, I pray that

blessing of almighty God may rest upon your counsels."



What it means The Queen always ends her speech with a final passage about

foreign policy. Normally, she includes a reference to state visits she will be

making herself. But that's missing this year after the palace's announcement

that her future travel arrangements are under review and that Prince Charles

will be stepping up his role.



The other bills confirmed national insurance contributions bill; local audit

bill; water bill; mesothelioma bill; defence reform bill; Northern Ireland bill;

and a draft Wales bill.



What the Queen didn't say No mention of the full-blown "snooper's charter"

plans, plain packaging for cigarettes, minimum alcohol pricing, guarantees on

overseas aid spending, or a bill to allow MPs to be recalled if constituents are

unhappy with them: basically, anything unpopular with Tory backbenchers or that

might be a dealbreaker in coalition terms. An EU in/out referendum also falls

under this category. Some of the omissions are about the tone of the speech -

the gay marriage bill will still go ahead. Some could be fatal.



