





Dame Marjorie Scardino, the first woman chief executive of a FTSE 100 company,

has said she believes the UK business community will ultimately back the

European Union in any referendum on Britain's membership.



Scardino, who was chief executive of Financial Times and Penguin owner Pearson

for 16 years until the end of 2012, said she thought business leaders were

intelligent enough to know where their best interests lay, which was in closer

European integration - even though her faith in the British business community

generally was "at a nadir".



"I think they will be for Europe in the end. I think the business community is

smart enough to realise that just having a trade union is not enough," she said.

"They are smart enough to know they need to be part of a union that has

political and financial power."



In January, David Cameron announced that if the Conservatives won the next

election, they would hold an in-out referendum on Britain's membership of the EU

before the end of 2017.



The prime minister also said that before that he would be seeking a new

settlement between the UK and Brussels, through a full treaty renegotiation or

other means, to repatriate powers to Britain, and that he wants the EU to

abandon its commitment to "ever closer union".



Scardino made the comments on the EU referendum during a question and answer

session after delivering the 2013 Hugo Young lecture in London on Tuesday

evening.



In her speech, she said she thought Young, the pro-European former Guardian

political columnist who died in 2003, would "likely have scolded the government

for pandering to Ukip".



Scardino, who was born and raised in Texas but has lived in the UK for 20 years,

also said the EU was in need of leaders of the stature of George Washington and

Abraham Lincoln to help it through its current political and financial malaise.



In a speech that drew comparisons between the EU and the development of the US

as a political union over more than two centuries, she added that having a

single, strong leader was one of the factors that had helped her native country

survive numerous political crises that could have torn it apart, including the

civil war.



Answering a question on this point, Scardino said she thought there was a "such

a paucity of imagination among politicians and business leaders" responsible for

making decisions about the EU's political and financial future.



"If you don't have anyone brave enough to say, 'We've got to have something to

bind ourselves together,' you are never



Captions:



pic of marge



