





David Cameron moved to repair relations with a bruised Conservative party by

emailing a "personal note" to all members in which he said he would never work

with anyone who "sneered" at activists.



Amid anger in the party at the allegations that a senior member of his inner

circle had referred to activists as "mad swivel-eyed loons", the prime minister

said the party was held together by "a deep and lasting friendship".



Cameron reached out after senior Tories, who were enraged by allegations that

the Tory co-chairman Lord Feldman had made disparaging remarks about Tory

activists, warned of a sea change in the parliamentary party as growing numbers

of MPs decide that the prime minister is becoming a liability. Feldman

strenuously denied the allegations which he described as "completely untrue".



But senior figures indicated that the chairman of the Conservative backbench

1922 committee, Graham Brady, was expected to receive further letters calling

for a confidence vote. Brady, who is understood to have been sent a limited

number in recent months, will have to call a vote if he receives at least 46.



One senior figure said: "This is worse than John Major. There was quite a lot of

sympathy for him because of the Maastricht rebels. He also listened. With

Cameron it feels like this could be terminal - and will be so before the

election."



The prime minister moved to stabilise his position by sending an impassioned

email to party members in which he wrote fondly of his 25 years as a party

member.



The prime minister wrote: "We have been together through good times and bad.

This is more than a working relationship; it is a deep and lasting friendship.

Ours is a companionship underpinned by what we believe. . .Time and again,

Conservative activists like you stand for duty, decency and civic pride."



Cameron addressed criticism of his inner circle. "I am proud to lead this party.

I am proud of what you do. And I would never have around me those who sneered or

thought otherwise. We are a team, from the parish council to the local

association to parliament, and I never forget it . . . To those reading this,

here is my message: there will always be criticism from the sidelines. But we

must remember what this party has always been about: acting in the national

interest."



Feldman fought off an attempt to hold an inquiry into his alleged comments after

he won overwhelming backing at a meeting of the Conservative party board. Brian

Binley, the Tory MP for Northampton South, agreed to withdraw his call for an

inquiry after the leadership agreed to "close the gap between the leadership and

grassroots". Feldman categorically denies making the remarks which were

reported, though not attributed to him, in the Times and the Daily Telegraph on

Saturday.



One MP said it was difficult to see how Cameron could turn around his fortunes

after a series of setbacks, not helped when he appointed two more Etonians to

his inner circle. "What is Cameron going to do? Rescind the Etonian hirings, say

I am not a snob? Of course not. This feels terminal. I can't predict how it will

happen but it feels like we are nearing the end."



Tories say the atmosphere in the parliamentary party has changed over the past

week after a consensus had been formed around Easter that the prime minister was

secure at least until next year's European parliamentary elections, which Ukip

is expected to win. The successful budget and the prime minister's widely

praised handling of the death of Lady Thatcher prompted opponents to back down.



But senior figures are saying Cameron's handling of the EU referendum vote, in

which he conceded that a bill should be passed in this parliament after

initially saying this was unnecessary, had weakened him even in the eyes of

Eurosceptics. The vote on gay marriage, in which Cameron was forced to negotiate

with Labour to protect a bill which is widely despised in the party, did little

to help matters.



One MP said: "People felt that things were moving in the right way. But we keep

mucking up. It is all mucking it up from an elitist perspective.



"Trying to be all things to all men doesn't work. This culture of 'we know

better than you' is unacceptable."



Others talk of "tectonic plates" - the phrase used by John Prescott to signal

the end of the Blair era - shifting. "Certainly the tremors are reverberating,"

one said.



Captions:



Lord Feldman denies that he described party activists as 'swivel-eyed loons'



