





The head of Britain's most powerful employers' organisation today issues a blunt

warning about the risks of quitting the European Union after the Conservative

party signalled the beginning of a drawn-out parliamentary battle over plans for

an in-out referendum by 2017.



John Cridland, the director general of the CBI, says the dispute over the timing

of a referendum was a diversion and scoffed at suggestions that Britain could

have an arms-length relationship with the EU similar to Norway's or

Switzerland's.



In a strongly worded article for the Guardian that forms the basis of a speech

later today, Cridland says: "This week's political demands for a bill to

underpin the prime minister's promise of an EU referendum have been a

distraction from securing growth and jobs, which have to be the UK's top

priority."



After coming top of the private member's ballot, the Tory MP James Wharton vowed

to champion the bill that will attempt to mandate the government to hold a

referendum by 2017. Downing Street said Tory MPs would be instructed by their

whips to vote for the bill.



Wharton's bill will receive its first reading in the Commons on 19 June. The

first slot for a private member's bill debate in the Commons is 5 July and

Wharton has said he has already been in discussions with government whips to

take up the bill prepared by his party earlier this week.



The move follows a show of strength by Tory Eurosceptics on Wednesday in a vote

on an amendment on the Queen's speech that regretted the absence of an in-out EU

referendum bill in the legislative programme. Dissenting Conservative MPs

numbered 114, although Cameron's aides insisted the vote was not a blow to his

authority because he had allowed a free vote and was relaxed about the outcome.



The developments have caused consternation in Europe, with the German

chancellor, Angela Merkel, saying she would appeal to Britain to stay in the EU.

Merkel told Germany's WDR television in Berlin that she views the UK as an

"important member of the EU" and will lobby "our British friends to stay in the

bloc".



She said she saw the forthcoming debate in the UK parliament "as being about

procedural questions right now. For my part, I will tell my British friends

again and again that it's good for you and it's good for us (if the UK stays in

the EU)."



Cridland took the unusual step of speaking publicly on an issue that divides the

CBI, saying: "The recent tussle presents an inward-looking picture of British

politics to the outside. For those in the business world, it feels like a

diversion from what we should be doing in Europe which is restoring growth,

through trade deals, and championing the reforms that we want to make all of

Europe more competitive."



He added: "Let's be clear. Being a member of a reformed EU is the best way to

preserve market access."



The CBI leader rejected claims that Britain could leave the EU but keep some of

the benefits of membership. "There are some who say that we could retain access

to the single market without being a member of the EU; that the UK could

withdraw and have a relationship with the EU more akin to Norway's or

Switzerland's. I'd urge them to really look at the detail."



Cridland said Britain would never accept Norway's status as a member of the

European Economic Area but not part of the EU. That meant Norway "still pays the

bills and follows the rules but has much lower influence on EU decision-making

than if it had a seat at the table".



The shadow leader of the house, Angela Eagle, said the Tories had "descended

into chaos on Europe, and the bill was 'entirely spurious' and did not include a

implementation clause or money resolution".



The Liberal Democrats' deputy leader, Simon Hughes, accused the Tories of

"obsessing about Europe".



