





David Cameron is "hiding behind the sofa" from Tory backbenchers, Ed Miliband

claims today, after it emerged that the prime minister may take the

unprecedented step of supporting a vote in parliament condemning his own

legislative programme because it does not propose a vote on EU membership.



The Labour leader will claim that the prime minister's decision to back an

amendment to the Queen's speech which criticises the absence of an in-out

referendum reveals an obsession with the party's interests instead of the

country's.



Miliband's speech comes as Cameron faces further pressure on Europe from senior

party figures. Yesterday, Boris Johnson said that withdrawal would not be

"cataclysmic" for British jobs, as Europhiles claim. The mayor of London was

speaking after Tory grandees Lord Lawson and Michael Portillo this week

advocated withdrawal from the EU and Tory backbenchers sought a referendum

amendment to the Queen's speech. Internal Conservative rows over Europe have

escalated following the strong showing of Ukip in the local elections this

month.



Miliband's speech, to the annual conference of the Blairite thinktank Progress,

will also be seen as an attempt to stamp his authority on his own party after

YouGov polling showed that his personal polling has hardly improved over the

last year.



Miliband will say: "We have the extraordinary spectacle of a government that

says it is relaxed about its own MPs voting against its own Queen's speech.



"He (Cameron) is not lying on the sofa relaxed. He's hiding behind the sofa, too

scared to confront his own MPs. He is flailing around, directionless, unable to

show the leadership the country needs."



The reason for this weakness, Miliband will say, is that Cameron has allowed

backbench MPs to push him around. "That's the only reason he changed his mind in

January on his previous position on an in/out referendum. It wasn't about the

national interest, it was simply about his party interest."



Conservative MPs have engineered a vote on an EU referendum by tabling an

amendment to the Queen's speech. The move has the support of longstanding

Eurosceptics such as John Redwood, Peter Bone, Edward Leigh, Bernard Jenkin and

David Davis. It is likely that the Speaker will accept the amendment, with a

vote in the Commons on Tuesday or Wednesday.



It is unlikely the amendment will be passed, as the Lib Dems will oppose it

along with the vast majority of Labour MPs, but significant minority support

within the Tories would be seized upon as an indication that Cameron is being

dictated to by his party's backbenches.



Yesterday, the prime minister's spokesman refused to rule out supporting the

amendment. "The amendment's only recently been tabled, so the PM would want to

carefully consider it. The key point here is that he has always made it clear

that he will look at all ways of strengthening his commitment to an in/out

referendum in the next parliament."



The prime minister is even considering voting for the change to the government's

programme, though this is highly unlikely because he is due to be in the US next

week. At present Cameron wants to hold the referendum after he has completed

negotiations with his EU partners after the 2015 general election.



Johnson told BBC Radio 4's Today programme: "We should be prepared to pull out.

That goes without saying. You can't go into a negotiation like that without

being willing to walk away."



He insisted that withdrawal would not be as damaging to the UK economy as

pro-Europeans claim. "I don't think it would be anything like as cataclysmic as

is being sometimes pretended," he said.



Captions:



Ed Miliband claims that David Cameron is 'hiding behind the sofa' from his

backbenchers on the issue of the EU



