





George Osborne suffered a bruising defeat in Europe yesterday as the 26 other EU

finance ministers imposed curbs on bankers' bonuses in an unprecedented move

targeted at the UK financial services sector.



Osborne had travelled to Brussels in a vain attempt to defeat proposals outlined

last week to set a limit of a year's salary on bankers' bonuses, protecting the

status of the City and Britain's biggest industry - financial services. "I

cannot support the proposal on the table," he told the session.



But his plea was ignored and Britain was left isolated, with no other government

opposing the move - which was also supported by the European Central Bank and

the European commission.



The City is by far the EU's biggest financial centre and financial services are

a tenth of the UK economy. It is an absolute, if unspoken, rule that EU

governments never take decisions opposed by a national government if it feels

that vital interests are imperilled. Germany had invariably supported Britain on

issues of EU regulation of financial services.



It is also not yet clear if the bonus caps will apply to European bank

subsidiaries operating outside the EU or to US and other foreign banks based in

London, Frankfurt and Paris.



The "broad political support" to clamp down on bankers represents a watershed in

Britain's relations with the EU, which have seldom been in greater uncertainty

as a result of David Cameron's actions in using a veto at an EU summit, when he

demanded an overhaul of the terms of UK membership and pledged a referendum on

whether to stay in the EU if he were to win a second term in 2015.



Martin Schulz, the president of the parliament, acknowledged Britain's position

but said: "An agreement has been reached on all aspects of the legislation.

There is no possible route for one member state to block the legislation. It

would appear that one state has severe difficulties with the agreement but the

EU must press ahead and get this important legislation on the statute book."



In what looked like a move to give Osborne an opportunity to save some face,

Germany suggested a slight postponement and slight adjustment of the new regime.

The timing and some of the fine detail of how the limits are implemented are to

be renegotiated over the next three weeks. But there was no doubt that the

central decision, to clamp down on bonuses, was irreversible.



Michel Barnier, the EU commissioner for the single market, said the year's

salary ceiling - or payouts equal to two years' salary only if approved by a

large majority of a bank's shareholders - was set in stone. He said it was

"crystal clear" that the cap would go ahead.



Barnier rounded on the recklessness of the casino capitalism culture he blamed

for the financial crises of the past five years, arguing that bankers were being

rewarded for dangerous risk-taking, while taxpayers had to foot the bills for

their failures. "Enough. It's over," he declared.



The new regime is to apply to 8,300 banks. Barnier wished "good luck" to those

in London considering legal action to try to overturn the bonus ceilings. The

new legislation, he said, would be on "a very solid legal basis."



Session chairman, Michael Noonan of Ireland, said the meeting achieved "broad

political support" for the limits on bankers' remuneration.



Osborne came under attack from Labour for being too slow to try to counter the

new legislation and for failing to table alternative proposals over the past

couple of years. "It shouldn't take the EU to rein in excessive bonuses," said

Ed Balls, the shadow chancellor.



He accused Osborne of "failing to engage with these sensible proposals until the

very last minute. It's no wonder that in Brussels he was outnumbered 26 to 1".



Osborne had mounted a robust argument against the proposals, asserting the curbs

could have a "perverse" effect, generating steep rises in bankers' pay, breaking

the link between performance and bonuses, and making it more difficult to "claw

back" bonuses when unmerited.



Wolfgang Schauble, the German finance minister, offered a way to soothe the

British, hoping to coax Osborne into not voting against the new rules, expected

to come into force next year. "There are a few technical issues still to be

clarified," he said. "Then I hope in the end the United Kingdom will agree."



The details still to be settled involve how the bonuses are structured, when

they are implemented, and who is subject to them. Under the existing proposal,

25% of a bonus can be made in the form of deferred payments, which are

discounted. Britain is trying to get that figure increased, perhaps to 30%.

Osborne is also seeking to delay the measures taking effect and may win a

postponement of between six and 12 months.Any changes will need to blessed by

the European parliament, which drove the new caps regime through.



The CBI said the bonus cap would hit the UK hard: "The proposals will damage the

competitiveness of the EU's financial services industry, hitting the UK

particularly hard at a time when growth should be the key priority." Britain's

powerful financial sector fears the rules will put London at a disadvantage and

provoke an exodus of major banks and staff to rival financial centres. A

spokesman for London-based Standard Chartered Bank said: "We are concerned about

it because we are a global bank and 97% of our staff are outside the EU. We are

concerned about our ability to be competitive in attracting talent."



