





his Eurosceptic rebels. In a rare move, heavyweight Tory backbenchers tabled an

amendment to acceptance of the Queen's speech, regretting the lack of a bill in

the speech paving the way for an EU referendum. The amendment will be voted on

next Tuesday.



Faced by the prospect of large-scale rebellion, Downing Street suggested Tory

ministers would be given a free vote next week, adding that Cameron was relaxed

about how his MPs voted. Supporters of the backbench Eurosceptic amendment,

including the former shadow home secretary David Davis, say it is carefully

worded to back the prime minister's position.



Cameron has told Conservative MPs he would like to introduce a bill guaranteeing

a referendum by 2017, but has been unable to do so because the Lib Dems

disagree.



The prime minister's spokesman said: "He is relaxed about (the amendment). He is

happy to look at all ways of strengthening his commitment to an in/out

referendum in the next parliament."



The spokesman suggested that people should not be surprised if Conservative and

Lib Dem ministers voted on opposite sides if the amendment was, as expected,

called by the Speaker.



Cameron will miss the vote because he will be in the US. The prime minister's

spokesman said: "The differences on this specific issue between the two parties

in the coalition are well known."



Asked whether the prime minister would be happy for ministers to vote for the

amendment, the spokesman said: "The prime minister is relaxed about it. The

implication of that is clear."



The Lib Dems mocked the Tory position. A spokesman said: "We will be voting with

the government which has a position on an EU referendum. This is that if there

is a major change in the balance of powers there will be a referendum."



But Clegg is frustrated that the Tories are allowing Europe to dominate the

fallout of the Queen's speech, overshadowing domestic issues, such as the new

single-tier pension and the new cap on social care costs.



The spokesman said: "The government needs to get out and tell people about the

good things in the Queen's speech and not spend another week bemoaning the

absence of a referendum."



Sir Malcolm Rifkind, the former foreign secretary, weighed into the debate

following the intervention of other Tory grandees, Lord Lawson and Michael

Portillo, who said this week that Britain would be better off out of the EU.



Rifkind said Lawson had thrown the equivalent of a "hand grenade into a small

building" by calling for Britain to leave.



Boris Johnson, the London mayor, and the former Tory chancellor Lord Lamont,

said Britain should be prepared to leave the EU if the prime minister failed to

renegotiate better membership terms.



Johnson told ITV News London: "We need a renegotiation to get rid of some of

that nonsense and to make the whole area more competitive, and if that fails,

then yes obviously we should be ready to walk away, we should be ready to

leave."



Captions:



'The government needs to get out and tell people about the good things in the

Queen's speech'



Nick Clegg



