





Downing Street was wrestling with a dilemma last night over how to respond after

a close ally of David Cameron was alleged to have described Tory activists as

"mad, swivel-eyed loons".



In remarks immediately seized on by Nigel Farage, the Ukip leader, the senior

Tory said that the party's MPs have to rebel against the leadership because they

face pressure from hardline associations.



Farage, who knows the identity of the Tory, tweeted: "If you are a Conservative

supporter who believes in Ukip ideas then your party hates you. Come and join

us."



The senior Tory made the remarks - in earshot of journalists - after being asked

about the decision of 116 Tory MPs to defy the prime minister and vote in favour

of an amendment regretting the absence of a EU referendum in the Queen's speech.



The Conservative said: "It's fine. There's really no problem. The MPs just have

to do it because the associations tell them to, and the associations are all

mad, swivel-eyed loons."



Downing Street faced pressure last night because the Tory has been well known to

the prime minister for many years and is due to play a significant role in the

party's preparations for the general election. The Times, Daily Telegraph, the

Daily Mirror, who all reported the remarks and who know the identity of the

Tory, declined to name the senior member of the prime minister's circle.



The publication of the remarks, which were made during the week while the prime

minister was in the US, are particularly embarrassing for Cameron. They come

after No 10 aides expressed fury with Philip Hammond, the defence secretary, who

criticised the government for devoting so much time to the gay marriage

legislation.



Downing Street aides are relaxed about Tory MPs, including ministers, voicing

opposition to gay marriage because it is a free vote. But they felt that the

defence secretary crossed a line when he criticised No 10 for devoting so much

parliamentary time to the issue. This was regarded as a deeply hostile act and

fed suspicions that Hammond is looking to become chancellor in a post- Cameron

government or even to make a play for the Tory leadership.



But No 10 has a more immediate crisis after the name of the Tory who criticised

Tory activists was running in Westminster circles last night. The senior figure

is expected to be named today.



Downing Street, which knows the name of the Tory, declined to comment last

night. But Farage is planning to exploit the embarrassment when the Tory is

named.



The Ukip leader is planning to say: "This person is an excellent recruiting

sergeant for Ukip. If constituency chairman or district chairmen of the local

Conservative associations feel uncomfortable, now is a good time to leave the

party."



