





A senior Tory has warned that David Cameron's leadership would be at stake if

the Conservative party loses next year's European parliamentary elections,

something most polls, political betting sites and Ukip have said was likely to

happen.



The warning came as the former deputy prime minister John Prescott became the

most senior Labour figure to call on Ed Miliband to back a referendum on Europe

now, ahead of Cameron's planned date of 2017.



The warning that the European elections could prove to be a flashpoint for

Cameron's premiership was made by David Ruffley, a member of the home affairs

select committee and a former Tory whip. He said MPs in marginal seats would be

unsettled if the prime minister had failed to turn around the party's fortunes

at the ballot box next year.



Ruffley told Sky's Murnaghan programme: "I think next May's Euro elections might

put pressure on him to go harder because there is a lot of speculation in and

around Downing Street, so I am led to believe, that Ukip might come first.



"Now if that happens next May there'll be 12 months before the election and some

of our colleagues in marginal seats might get a bit windy. I don't think Ukip

are going to win seats but they could split the Conservative vote if they are

strong and let Labour through in those marginal seats."



Ruffley said the Conservative party would give him time to see if his EU

referendum bill reached the statute book.



A ComRes poll in January put Labour on 35% (up 19 percentage points on its

performance at the 2009 European elections), Ukip on 23% (up six) Conservatives

on 22% (down six) and Liberal Democrats on 8% (down five).



The Ukip leader, Nigel Farage, has already promised a political earthquake if

his party tops the poll next year. The regional list electoral system used in

the European elections is suited to Ukip because the party matters more than the

individuals who get elected. Ukip is currently favourite to win.



Prescott intervened in the European debate, writing in the Mirror over the

weekend: "Cameron thought he was shooting Ukip's fox by offering a referendum.

All they want to do is save their seats in 2015. So Labour should call his

bluff. We should continue to put the economy, jobs and the national interest

first.



"That's why Ed Miliband should call for an in-out referendum on Europe. Not to

be held in 2017 but NOW!



"Labour could still continue to argue the need for reforming Europe during the

debate. Like the 1975 referendum, this would be a consultative poll, with

parliament making the final decision. A public vote either way could strengthen

our negotiation position for reform with our European partners.



"I believe during a referendum campaign, after both sides have been put, more

people will decide to stay, just as they did in 1975."



23%



Ukip opinion poll rating for the European elections according to a ComRes

survey, just ahead of the Conservatives



