





British prime ministers are advised to show a little humility when the US

president receives them in the East Room of the White House.



Hanging on the wall is the Lansdowne portrait of 1797, depicting George

Washington, which was rescued during the burning of Washington in 1814 when

British troops set fire to public buildings throughout the city.



Still, despite the reminder of a not always easy relationship, Obama hailed

Cameron as his "friend and partner" at the start of a joint press conference

after an hour of talks in the Oval Office. Obama's gushing language was in the

familiar tradition of recent US presidents who score an easy hit with visiting

British prime ministers by lavishing them with praise and hailing the

Anglo-American special relationship.



But this time Obama went further and offered Cameron some useful cover as he

tries to fight growing pressure in the Conservative party to hold an immediate

in/out referendum on Britain's EU membership.



In a rare intervention in the internal workings of an allied country, Obama

said: "You probably want to see if you can fix what is broken in a very

important relationship before you break it off. It makes some sense to me."



The president's carefully scripted remarks produced paroxysms of excitement

among aides with the prime minister. "Most powerful man on earth supports PM's

position," one said.



Obama's intervention on such a touchstone issue for Cameron shows how the prime

minister has succeeded in forging a relationship that goes beyond the usual

pleasantries. The president, whose respect for Cameron grew when he took such a

strong stance on Libya, is now prepared to go out on a limb and help his "friend

and partner" when he faces pressure back home. But Obama indicated that his

support would not be unconditional, as he gave a gentle hint of US unease about

the prime minister's plans to renegotiate Britain's EU membership terms if he

wins the 2015 general election.



The president said he would wait to see the outcome of the negotiations before

giving a judgment. Obama even suggested the negotiations may not be successful

when he said he "would be interested in seeing whether or not those are

successful before rendering a final judgment".



The nuanced messages from Obama on the EU show the president thinks the pressure

on Cameron is palpably wrongheaded and should be resisted. But his clarion call

for Britain to remain in the EU - as a way of strengthening both British and US

interests - shows that Obama believes a battle lies ahead of potentially global

significance.



The prime minister greeted the support from Obama with good grace as he saw the

president deprive some eurosceptics of a vital weapon in their armoury - that

Britain should choose the US over the EU.



But he was not afraid to voice his unease over a failure to act on Syria as he

announced an extra £10m to fund non-lethal weaponry to the Syrian opposition.



Captions:



Reaching out



David Cameron and Barack Obama at the White House press conference yesterday,

where the president made a rare foray into Britain's internal politics

Photograph: Jim Watson/AFP/Getty Images



