





A rebel Tory plot to force David Cameron to hold an EU referendum next year

backfired yesterday, after it was pilloried by most Conservatives.



Adam Afriyie, the Conservative MP for Windsor, called for a vote on Britain's

membership of the European Union on 23 October next year, rather than the

official Conservative promise to hold a poll before the end of 2017.



Afriyie, who was rumoured to be behind a plan to oust the prime minister earlier

this year, said he would not be able to sleep at night if the public were not

given a say on the issue before the election. To achieve an early vote, he is

planning to table an amendment to the EU referendum bill, which is supported by

the Tory leadership.



Within hours, it became clear he had hit the wrong note, as some of the most

eurosceptic MPs in the party pleaded with him to reconsider his position for the

sake of unity. The only vocal supporter was Tom Watson, the Labour backbencher

who said he would probably vote with Afriyie. "I think there are a lot of people

who think we need clarity on this now," he said.



The Labour party also refused to rule out backing the amendment, despite Chuka

Umunna, the shadow business secretary, saying the party does not agree with the

Tory plan for a referendum on the basis of a renegotiation on Britain's

relationship with the EU that has not yet happened. Labour has refused to set

out its thinking on whether an EU referendum is necessary but it is possible Ed

Miliband could use Afriyie's amendment to derail the bill.



Asked how Labour will vote, a senior party source said: "We will respond to the

amendment after it is published."



Some Labour figures believe backing an early vote could cause bitter divisions

on the Tory benches before the election as well as settling the issue once and

for all. One of the party's MPs also pointed out any parliamentary time spent on

Afriyie's amendment increases the chance the Conservative-backed EU referendum

bill will be "talked out". This is the technical term for when legislation

proposed by a backbencher is killed off because it has run out of its allotted

time for discussion.



Afriyie's challenge, laid out in an article for the Mail on Sunday, also gave

Labour another chance to accuse the Conservatives of dithering over Europe when

they should be addressing the economy and living standards.



Michael Dugher MP, a shadow cabinet minister and Labour vice-chairman, said it

was a sign "the Tories are back to obsessing about the European Union".



Afriyie's amendment provoked a furious reaction from the Conservative

leadership, with Downing Street saying a referendum would not be allowed to take

place next year "under any circumstances".



Theresa May, the home secretary, also slapped down the plan, telling the BBC's

Andrew Marr Show, "Adam's got it wrong" and could "possibly jeopardise the

bill".



Yesterday, dozens of Tory MPs lined up to criticise Afriyie for disrupting the

short-lived Conservative consensus on Europe.



Cheryl Gillan, a former Conservative cabinet minister, warned Afriyie's move

would play into Labour's hands.



"I do take issue with him taking this up at this particular time," she told the

Murnaghan programme on Sky News. "I think he's jumping the gun here. I think

Labour would be very happy for this referendum to take place next year because

they wouldn't have to make a decision."



Chris Heaton-Harris, MP for Daventry, said he had only been in parliament three

years, but knew the Afriyie amendment would "make a referendum less likely",

while Nick de Bois, MP for Enfield North, who wants to leave the EU as things

stand, said the timing was wrong.



"No government can hope to influence and reach agreement with EU members on a

renegotiated, less intrusive but more pro-single market European Union within a

year," he wrote on the ConservativeHome website. "Neither can we hope to

stimulate public engagement that will help to decide if we leave or remain.



Meanwhile, Sarah Wollaston, MP for Totnes, said she thought it would "scupper

opportunity for renegotiation".



Afriyie stuck to his argument that a referendum before the election is needed

because the British public is "suspicious" about whether it will happen.



"This is about every MP searching their conscience and asking: do they want to

agree with 80% of the population who want a referendum in the bag," he told Sky

News. " This is nothing to do with me and David Cameron. It is to do with me and

my conscience, making sure that I, as a backbench MP, make sure that parliament

has the option to decide whether to have a referendum in 2014."



Captions:



Adam Afriyie, denies political ambition. He says his drive for an early

referendum is a matter of personal conscience



