





The dispute about Europe intensified yesterday as the Conservative party

co-chairman Grant Shapps challenged Nick Clegg to show courage and back a draft

in/out EU referendum bill, accusing the Liberal Democrats of "complete disdain"

for the views of the British people.



Tory officials pointed to what they described as the hypocrisy of Clegg's

abandoned promise in 2010 for a referendum on Europe.



With Clegg standing in for David Cameron at prime minister's questions today,

the deputy prime minister is expecting to be harried by Tory backbenchers

challenging him to support the draft bill.



The Tories are hoping to shift the political pressure away from their own

internal divisions and shift the public focus on to the refusal of Lib Dems and

Labour to make a matching commitment.



Cameron served notice on Tory Eurosceptics that a draft parliamentary bill

published yesterday, paving the way for a referendum on Britain's EU membership

by 2017, is a "red line" that marks his final offer. The bill states that voters

would be asked the question, "Do you think that the United Kingdom should remain

a member of the European Union?"



Announcing he would be prepared to back a private members' bill, the prime

minister - speaking from Boston - denied he was panicked into rushing forward

the measure. "Not at all. If this was a Conservative-only government we would

just get on and legislate.



"But I have always said that anything we can do to strengthen the pledge . . .

we should do." Cameron insisted it was "completely wrong" to suggest that he

changes tack on Europe to appease his party.



A senior Tory source said: "This is our red line. We are not going to give any

more ground. We have got Obama and now this bill. It is like building a dam."



The prime minister said that he was "profoundly relaxed" as he confirmed that he

would abstain in today's Commons vote if he were in London.



Tory whips acknowledge the rushed offer of a draft bill has not bought off as

many Tory sceptics as they had hoped, with as many as 80 Tory MPs pressing ahead

with their plan to back an amendment regretting the absence of a an in/out

referendum bill in the Queen's speech.



Tory sources denied that the brief draft bill, intended to be picked up by a

Tory MP as a private members' bill, has no chance of reaching the statute book.



In a sign of the exasperation of Cameron loyalists, Nicholas Soames complained

of his Eurosceptic colleagues behaving as if they were in a pub argument: "So

thin appears to be the trust that not even the prime minister's word is accepted

by members of his own party."



The sceptics, he added, had insatiable demands. "You concede a yard and

immediately . . . they want more. I think it is a lunatic way of proceeding."



But Cameron opened up a new front when he insisted that he was demonstrating

leadership on Europe and blamed the Lib Dems for blocking a full government

bill. He told Sky News: "When all the dust has settled I think that people will

be able to see that there is one party, the Conservative party, offering that

in/out referendum and two other mainstream parties, the Liberal Democrats and

Labour, who oppose an in/out referendum . . . It is in the national interest to

change Europe and change the relationship with Europe."



A senior Tory source made clear that No 10 will use the draft bill to step up

pressure on Labour and the Lib Dems.



Captions:



Grant Shapps, above, accused Clegg of contempt for the view of the people



