





David Cameron is to order the new head of the HS2 high-speed train line to cut

the cost of the £42bn project, just weeks after Labour said it would not give

the project a "blank cheque".



The prime minister will ask Sir David Higgins, the man in charge of overseeing

the Olympics, to bring in the north-south train line under budget after the

opposition raised concerns about its soaring cost and an official analysis

showed its value for money is falling. He will make the demands at a business

conference today, calling on Higgins to make sure he "maximises the benefits for

all parts of the country".



Cameron will also once again criticise Labour for wavering over the project, and

will argue that scrapping HS2 would "betray everyone north of Watford and

condemn Britain to the slow lane". However, his move to cut costs suggests Ed

Miliband has put him the back foot.



Last week, Labour supported legislation giving millions of pounds to HS2 for

preliminary work but the party has left open the possibility that it could

withdraw support in future.



Ed Balls, the shadow chancellor, will repeat his reservations about the project

and call for costs to be brought down, saying the current bill is closer to

£50bn. "We will take a hard-headed look at the costs and benefits of the scheme

to ensure this is the best way to spend £50bn for the future of our country,"

Balls will say.



Both Cameron and Balls will make their remarks at the annual conference of the

CBI, the industry lobby group for big business, which has criticised Labour for

its proposal to freeze energy prices. However, the group yesterday gave a

cautious welcome to the opposition's plan to give tax breaks to companies that

offer a living wage, which at £7.45 (£8.55 in London) is higher than the minimum

wage.



John Cridland, the head of the CBI, told BBC Radio 5 the scheme should help at

the margins and was to be applauded.



The CBI is also due to release a new study suggesting membership of the European

Union is worth £3,000 to every household in the country, and that eight out of

10 firms would vote to stay in the EU if there were a referendum tomorrow.



Balls will make his strongest argument yet for a reformed Europe, with sources

saying Labour is preparing to push the PM to be more specific about how he would

like Britain's relationship with Brussels to change. The shadow chancellor will

say the UK is better placed to shape Europe's future if it is "fully engaged

rather than having one foot out the door".



Balls is likely to avoid giving any indication of whether Labour could back a

referendum but he will say the party will not take public support for Europe for

granted



Writing in the Guardian today, the business secretary, Vince Cable, stresses the

importance of EU membership, as he attacks the "fantasists on the right who

dream of a lost world of global empire and believe we can walk away from the

successful trading block on our doorsteps".



