





David Cameron has issued a blunt warning to Conservative Eurosceptics that his

"very clear, very decisive policy" to hold a referendum on Britain's EU

membership by the end of 2017 is not up for renegotiation.



In an attempt to draw a line under a bumpy few weeks in which Eurosceptics

demanded a toughening of his policy and Tory traditionalists criticised him for

pressing ahead with a gay marriage bill, the prime minister said he would stand

firm.



But Cameron, who spoke of his pride in legalising gay marriage, tried to reach

out to the right by saying he would now focus on the "big picture" issues of the

economy rather than social issues.



"Is this the first now of many other issues like that," he asked in an interview

on the Today programme on Radio 4. "No it isn't. The government now is going to

be absolutely focused on the big picture which is fixing our economy, reforming

welfare, making sure there are good schools for our children to go to."



But the prime minister adopted a different tone as he rejected calls from

Eurosceptics to hold a referendum before the planned date of 2017, or even to

hold two votes. David Davis, the former Tory leadership contender, is calling

for an initial "mandate" referendum to give the prime minister authority from

the British people to renegotiate the terms of Britain's EU membership.



Cameron said: "On 24 January, I set out a very clear, very compelling policy for

the country towards Europe, which is to renegotiate our relationship with

Europe, to make the European Union more open, competitive and flexible, and then

to offer the British people something they haven't had for decades - an in-out

referendum. It's a very clear, very decisive policy.



"Let me say, this policy, it doesn't matter the pressure I come under from

outside the Conservative party, or in Europe, or inside the Conservative party,

this policy isn't going to change. The question isn't going to change. The

number of referenda isn't going to change. The fact is, it's the right policy

for the country."



The prime minister also joined forces with Nick Clegg in vowing that the

coalition would last the full five-year term. He said on Today: "That is

absolutely my intention and has always been. To anyone who doubts what life

there is left in the coalition, I would argue there is more to come - very bold

reforming, and strong government, and that is what we'll be right up until

polling day."



Captions:



David Davis has called for an initial 'mandate' referendum to give the prime

minister authority to negotiate new EU terms



