





The Conservative policy of holding a referendum on staying in or quitting the

European Union would not necessarily prevent the Liberal Democrats forming

another coalition with them, Nick Clegg indicated last night. The Lib Dem

leader's acceptance of a referendum as part of a future governing deal could be

crucial to forming a coalition if neither the Conservatives nor Labour win an

outright majority at the next general election in 2015.



Clegg repeated his opposition to the proposal, outlined by Cameron on Wednesday,

that a future Tory government would renegotiate Britain's membership of the EU

and then hold a referendum.



A poll for theTimes this morning showed that if a referendum was held now, 40%

would vote in favour of leaving the EU, with 37% wanting to stay and 23%

undecided.



"I simply don't understand the point of spending years and years tying yourself

up in knots first, so-called 'renegotiating' the terms of Britain's membership

in ways that at the moment at least, are completely vague," Clegg said during

his weekly phone-in programme on LBC radio. "And I think that discourages

investment and inhibits growth in jobs."



However, when pressed on whether it would prevent the Lib Dems forming another

coalition with the Conservatives, Clegg appeared to suggest that ways could be

found to accept the referendum. Such a move has precedent in the last coalition

agreement, where Tories supported a holding a referendum on alternative voting,

but campaigned against the idea.



"I'll follow the instructions of the British people," said Clegg. "If a

coalition is necessary following the votes of the British people, then we'll

play our part."



Asked by LBC presenter Nick Ferrari to confirm that he was saying the Lib Dem

leader "could work with him (Cameron) in a coalition", Clegg added: "I will

always play a responsible role. I've done it in the past at some political cost

and I'll do it again if necessary to provide . . . good government in the

national interest."



Meanwhile, the German chancellor, Angela Merkel, followed up her cautious

indication on Wednesday that she was open to a "fair compromise" by yesterday

describing Cameron as a "friend" and telling the World Economic Forum in Davos

that the eurozone's rules should be "binding" for themselves but "freely

accessible" to other EU countries such as the UK.



Billionaire George Soros also waded into the debate over a possible EU

referendum yesterday. Speaking over dinner at Davos, Soros said that Cameron was

responding to pressure from his own backbenchers with "a dangerous gambit which

could actually lead to Britain leaving (the EU)". He added that the UK is

currently in "the best of all possible positions," because it is a member of the

EU, without being part of the crisis-hit single currency.



Simon Jenkins, page 35 >=



