





Lord Howe, the former chancellor who brought down Lady Thatcher, in part over

Europe, has criticised David Cameron's plan to hold a referendum on Britain's EU

membership.



As the former Liberal Democrat leader Lord Ashdown said that the Tories were

intent on taking Britain out of the EU, Howe said that parliament should have

the final say over the UK's place in Europe.



The intervention by the two prominent pro-Europeans in a House of Lords debate

on Europe came amid signs that coalition talks are close to breakdown over

whether Britain will exercise its opt-out of EU police and criminal justice

measures. The Guardian has learned that talks between Danny Alexander of the Lib

Dems and Oliver Letwin of the Tories have effectively broken down over which of

the 130 measures are regarded as so vital that Britain would immediately ask

Brussels for permission to opt back into them.



Howe questioned Cameron's plan to hold a referendum by the end of 2017 if he

wins the next general election. The former chancellor, who prompted Michael

Heseltine to challenge Thatcher in 1990, told peers: "I would like to think I

was wrong in suspecting that the prime minister's sudden conversion to the

merits of a referendum is less about occupying the moral high ground of

democratic consent than the search for a means to overcome the problems of

internal party management."



Howe, who steered through the EEC accession bill as attorney general in Ted

Heath's government in the early 1970s, added: "I don't believe a referendum is

the way in which to address this question. Our own national parliament . . . not

a widely consulted referendum, is the true source of democratic legitimacy and

accountability."



Ashdown spoke of a "virulent little Englander" movement in the Conservative

party, which "want out altogether". He added: "The difference between Britain

and the rest is we are negotiating wanting to get out, while the rest of them

are negotiating wanting to get further in."



The prime minister came under fire in the Lords as the US administration

reiterated its belief that Britain should remain an active member of the EU. An

adviser to Joe Biden, the US vice-president who is to visit Britain next week,

said: "Obviously it's up to member states of the EU to make their own decisions.

With respect to prime minister Cameron's speech, we obviously support his

comments about the important role of the UK in the EU. We leave it to EU member

states to have discussions."



Another US official said: "It's in our interest for there to be a strong UK in a

strong EU."



The remarks echo the intervention by Philip Gordon, the US assistant secretary

for European affairs, who said that the US wanted Britain to remain an active

member of the EU.



The calls from the US came as coalition divisions over Europe risked scuppering

negotiations over British co-operation on EU police and criminal justice

measures. Both sides of the coalition agree that Britain should exercise a

right, granted by the Lisbon treaty, to opt out of around 130 justice and home

affairs (JHA) measures. But the Liberal Democrats will not sanction this mass

opt-out unless the Tories agree to opt back in to key measures such as the

European arrest warrant.



A source with knowledge of the talks has confirmed that "they are not making a

great deal of progress; they are having to work through the package on a

case-by-case basis".



A breakdown over the issue has serious implications for David Cameron's strategy

on Europe, as this is one of the main matters on which he was hoping to secure

demonstrable progress this side of the general election.



The row at the heart of the coalition's European strategy broke out yesterday

when the minister without portfolio, Ken Clarke, "announced" on BBC Radio 4's

Today programme that ministers would opt back in to 30 of the 130 measures that

were regarded as essential for crime and justice purposes.



Captions:



Howe said parliament should have the final say on the UK's place in Europe



