





Lord Feldman, the Conservative co-chairman, is to be challenged at a meeting of

the party board today over allegations that he made disparaging remarks about

Tory grassroots activists.



As the health secretary, Jeremy Hunt, led a cabinet fightback on behalf of

Feldman, who denies having described activists as "mad, swivel-eyed loons", a

member of the Tory party board said he would be asking Feldman to explain

himself.



Brian Binley, the Conservative MP for Northampton South who has been an officer

of the party for 54 years, said: "This is a very disturbing matter and needs a

full and proper review at the party board meeting. From that meeting I will

decide how I will act thereafter."



The involvement of the board, which represents the views of Tory activists, will

dismay Downing Street after it spent the weekend rubbishing reports in the Times

and Daily Telegraph about Feldman's alleged comments. Feldman described the

reports as "completely untrue".



No 10 was particularly sensitive because the alleged remarks revived criticism

of the Tory leadership for being aloof and out of touch. Hunt spoke for Downing

Street when he told the Andrew Marr Show on BBC1: "The person who is alleged to

have said that has denied it and I know the individual and I trust him. "



The unease across the party was highlighted yesterday when 35 current or former

Conservative associations handed in a letter to Downing Street that accused the

prime minister of showing "utter contempt" for the grassroots activists after

pressing ahead with legislation for equal marriage.



Ben Harris-Quinney, the chairman of the Bow Group and director of Conservative

Grassroots, which drummed up support for the letter, said of Feldman's alleged

remarks: "It doesn't matter who made these comments, the problem is that it

comes as no surprise and is representative of a wider malaise in the party - the

disconnect between the leadership and the grassroots, between conservatism and

the leadership of the Conservative party. The tail cannot continue to wag the

dog."



The Bow Group, which was founded in 1951, intervened in the wake of Feldman's

alleged remarks on Wednesday night - said to have been made shortly after 116

Tory MPs showed their unease with David Cameron over Europe and voted in favour

of an amendment regretting the absence of an EU referendum in the Queen's

speech.



Taunted by a journalist about the vote, an unnamed senior member of Cameron's

inner circle was quoted by the Times and the Daily Telegraph as saying: "It's

fine. There's really no problem. The MPs just have to do it because the

associations tell them to, and the associations are all mad, swivel-eyed loons."



The alleged remarks were particularly damaging because they appeared to echo the

prime minister's language. The FT reported in March that Cameron "tells

colleagues that anyone who wants to talk to him about the EU is 'swivel-eyed'".

The FT article was not challenged by No 10.



Downing Street said over the weekend that the Times and Telegraph, which

reported the remarks, had no credibility because they had declined to name

Feldman, who admitted talking briefly to journalists at the Intercontinental

Hotel at Westminster.



The Tory co-chair recognised one of the journalists when he popped out of a

private room, where he was attending a dinner hosted by the Conservative Friends

of Pakistan.



The journalist and another colleague, who was attending a dinner in the hotel's

Blue Boar Smokehouse restaurant with the prime minister's former civil service

press secretary Steve Field, had a brief conversation with Feldman about the

vote. Field and two other journalists did not hear the conversation.



Feldman has said he is consulting his lawyers over the publication of the

comments, which he said do not "represent my view of our activists".



Binley said: "I would be hurt and surprised if Andrew Feldman said these things.

But I am in a serious quandary here because I don't believe senior journalists

would say these things if they didn't have the basis of truth.



"That is why it is no good simply saying Andrew Feldman is an honourable man, it

is no good simply saying I'm going to talk to my lawyer about this. I personally

- and the voluntary sector (of the party) - need to know the truth of this

matter."



David Mellor, a former member of John Major's cabinet, said the row highlighted

the need to have a heavyweight figure as Tory chairman. Feldman is co-chairman

along with the MP Grant Shapps. Mellor told the Murnaghan Programme on Sky News:

"I am old enough to remember the days when the Tory party chairman was a serious

political figure and chosen because they were a serious political figure.

Feldman is a great friend of the prime minister.



"He strenuously denies (the remarks). But, if so, I have to say as a former

lawyer - sue them. Where is the writ? I think we will find the writ will not

appear.



"If it was him - as newspapers suggest - then this has been a disaster waiting

to happen because you cannot elevate tennis playing friends to be chairman of

the Conservative party without there being a political price to pay."



Captions:



116



Number of Tory MPs who backed an amendment regretting the absence of an EU

referendum in the Queen's speech



