





Relieved Liberal Democrats claimed a narrow victory early this morning in the

Eastleigh byelection, fending off a surge by Ukip that forced the Conservatives

into third place - putting huge pressure on David Cameron to show he has a

strategy to win the 2015 election.



The Liberal Democrat candidate Mike Thornton won the seat with a majority of

1,771, taking 13,342 votes to Ukip's 11,571.



The Tories' candidate Maria Hutchings came in third with 10,559. Labour's John

O'Farrell came fourth with 4,088. Turnout was 52.8 %.



Nick Clegg, facing growing questions over his own leadership, will regard it as

a stunning triumph that his party survived against the backdrop of the previous

Lib Dem MP Chris Huhne resigning and now facing a prison sentence for asking his

wife to take speeding points.



Clegg also faced a week-long media barrage in the run-up to polling day over his

handling of allegations of sexual impropriety by the party's former chief

executive, Lord Rennard.



The former party leader Paddy Ashdown praised Clegg's resilience, saying he had

withstood "the most ravenous media feeding frenzy I have ever experienced as a

Lib Dem in 40 years of politics".



Simon Hughes, the Lib Dem deputy leader, said the result showed the party could

retain its fortresses at the 2015 election, and was a victory for its local

organisation. An even more ebullient party president Tim Farron claimed: "This

is a staggering result and the people who had written us off will have egg all

over their faces. It will a turning point in this parliament and that we are in

a position to win this seat completely changes the narrative of the parliament".



Thornton praised the effective fighting spirit in his party.



The Conservative failure in Eastleigh raises searching questions over whether

Cameron has a credible strategy not just to topple the 15 Lib Dem-held seats

needed to secure an overall majority, but also to prevent Ukip as the new party

of protest gnawing into his wider vote in the next general election.



All the mainstream parties will now have to decide whether to respond to Ukip's

growing popularity by becoming more Eurosceptic and anti-immigrant, or instead

challenging the party as an empty vehicle of protest. Cameron had hoped he had

immunised himself from the Ukip threat by promising a referendum on EU

membership after the election, and ramping up the rhetoric on EU migration.



The Ukip candidate Diane James said: "The result was momentous. Three weeks ago

we said we wanted to create a four way marginal what we have done is create a

two-way marginal. To have come from absolutely nowhere to achieve that is a

fantastic result".



Nigel Farage, Ukip's leader, promised to put 2,000 candidates into the field in

the May county council elections, insisting that "this was not a freak result,

but shows that something is moving".



He predicted border controls and immigration will become central to the future

EU debate in the UK, and claimed a "political earthquake" was coming.



The Conservative chairman Grant Shapps said it was rare for a governing party to

capture a seat, but insisted that "come a general election voters will make a

choice between whether they wanted David Cameron or Ed Miliband walking up

Downing Street".



Labour came a disappointing fourth, but denied the result casts a shadow over Ed

Miliband's claims that his vision of One Nation Labour has enough content to

appeal in southern England. In 2010, Labour won nearly 10% of the vote in

Eastleigh, but instead of Labour becoming the vehicle for a protest against the

government, Ukip - which had 3.6% share in 2010 - has surged past Labour.



Labour admitted immigration had been the main national issue on the doorstep,

and Miliband is to dedicate a TV political broadcast to the issue next

Wednesday,



Labour insisted it could still win its target seats in the south but added that

in Eastleigh it simply did not have the local base in a short campaign to match

the Lib Dems' ground operation.



The Lib Dems poured thousands of activists into the seat, they have a

stranglehold on the council and Clegg visited the constituency five times.



But as recently as the 1994 byelection, when there was a Conservative government

and Labour were the main opposition, Labour secured 27.6%.



In 2005, when Labour last won a general election, they scored 20.6% in

Eastleigh.



Patrick Diamond, page 38 >=



Captions:



Mike Thornton, the Lib Dem candidate, secured victory



in the bitterly fought Eastleigh byelection early this morning



