





David Cameron last night scrapped plans to deliver a long-awaited speech on

Britain's future in the European Union after abandoning a trip to the

Netherlands as the Algerian hostage crisis worsened.



Downing Street indicated that the prime minister would deliver his speech, in

which he planned to warn that Britain could "drift towards the exit" unless

powers are handed back from the EU, once the hostage crisis has ended. The

postponement was announced shortly before the prime minister was due to fly to

meet the Dutch prime minister Mark Rutte before his speech in Amsterdam.



Some Tories were surprised No 10 took so long to abandon the trip. Downing

Street had acknowledged the gravity of the crisis in Algeria yesterday morning

by announcing that arrangements were being made for the prime minister to chair

a meeting of the emergency Cobra committee from The Hague today.



Cameron had been due to warn his fellow European leaders that British membership

of the EU could be put at risk unless its membership terms are changed. "If we

don't address these challenges the danger is that Europe will fail and the

British people will drift towards the exit," Cameron was due to say in the

speech to an audience of business leaders in Amsterdam.



"There is a growing frustration that the EU is seen as something that is done to

people rather than acting on their behalf. And this is being intensified by the

very solutions required to resolve the economic problems.



"People are increasingly frustrated that decisions taken further and further

away from them mean their living standards are slashed through enforced

austerity or their taxes are used to bail out governments on the other side of

the continent."



The prime minister had planned to brief the leaders of France and Italy last

night on his speech. He was due to declare that he will demand the repatriation

of some powers if he wins an overall majority at the next election. The new

terms of British membership would then be put to the people in a referendum,

possibly around 2018.



"More of the same will not secure a long-term future for the eurozone. More of

the same will not see the European Union keeping pace with the new powerhouse

economies. More of the same will not bring the European Union any closer to its

citizens. More of the same will just produce more of the same - less

competitiveness, less growth, fewer jobs. And that will make our countries

weaker not stronger," Cameron was due to say.



But the prime minister was given a taste of the unease among business leaders

when Sir Andrew Cahn, until recently head of the government's main overseas

trade body UK Trade and Investment, told the Guardian: "The chill factor is

there, the nagging worry that the UK is retreating into inconsequential

isolation."



Lord Browne, the former BP boss, said: "Uncertainty is the enemy of investment,

and we should be wary of doing anything which tarnishes Britain's reputation as

a home of choice for human and financial capital."



The prime minister was due to say that he supports British membership of the EU

and that his aim is to stabilise support in Britain by addressing concerns about

power amassed in Brussels. He wants to use a major revision of the Lisbon

treaty, which may take place after the European parliamentary elections in 2014,

to table his demand for the repatriation of social and employment legislation.



Cameron planned to outline the three major challenges Europe faces as the

eurozone crisis, weak European competitiveness and a lack of democratic

accountability. Failure to address these would increase support among those who

want to leave, though he was due to say that is not his preference. "I do not

want that to happen. I want the European Union to be a success and I want a

relationship between Britain and the EU that keeps us in it."



Nicholas Watt and Juliette Jowit



Polly Toynbee, page 31 >=



