





Britain and France are heading for a battle at a European summit on the EU's

trillion-euro budget this week after Francois Hollande singled out the UK as the

biggest obstacle to a breakthrough agreement.



As Downing Street indicated that David Cameron would join forces with Angela

Merkel to demand cuts in the budget, the French president criticised those

calling for "swingeing cuts" while also seeking to preserve their rebates. That

was a reference to the unloved British compensation won by Margaret Thatcher in

1984.



The French leader also indirectly criticised Cameron's recent speech on Europe

pledging a referendum on UK membership of a reformed EU, stating that there

could be no "a la carte Europe".



In his first address to the European parliament in Strasbourg two days before

what is certain to be a gruelling Brussels summit of EU leaders on a new

seven-year budget, Hollande made clear that his key objective was to defend the

contested common agricultural policy which eats up almost 40% of EU spending and

of which France is the biggest beneficiary.



Hollande said he was attending the Brussels summit tomorrow and on Friday

looking for a compromise agreement. "I'm told that can't happen with the United

Kingdom. But why should one country decide for the other 26?"



This week's summit follows a failed first attempt to reach a deal on the budget

in November, with the British arguing for further reductions of at least euros

30bn (£26bn) on the overall package of euros 973bn proposed by Herman Van

Rompuy, the summit chair.



Cameron, who won support for his position from the Germans, Dutch and

Scandinavians in November, told the cabinet yesterday that spending needed to be

reduced below the Van Rompuy proposal. The prime minister, who spoke to Merkel

on Sunday, warned ministers that negotiations are often difficult and can take

time.



His spokesman said: "The position is very much that of November where we were

working with countries such as Sweden, the Netherlands, Denmark and Germany

because we all agree that spending needs to be reduced further. It is something

the prime minister and the German chancellor reiterated on Sunday. In terms of

reaching agreement - these negotiations have always been difficult. They can

often take considerable time."



But in a sign that Britain could be a more isolated this week, Merkel is to go

to Paris today to try to thrash out a deal with Hollande ahead of the summit.



Captions:



Francois Hollande addresses the European parliament in Strasbourg



