





David Cameron is struggling to maintain Tory discipline over Europe after

cabinet loyalists Michael Gove and Philip Hammond said yesterday they would vote

to leave the European Union if a referendum were to be held now.



Gove, the education minister, confirmed for the first time that he believes that

leaving the EU would have "certain advantages", while Hammond, the defence

secretary, later said he too would vote to leave if he was asked to endorse the

EU "exactly as it is today".



The timing of their comments will cause consternation for the prime minister as

he attends talks with Barack Obama in the White House, where he will press for

an EU-US trade deal that he claims would bring £10bn of annual benefits to

Britain.



The remarks, which follow similar calls by Lord Lawson and Michael Portillo last

week for Britain to leave Europe, are particularly significant because they are

the first cabinet ministers to say they would vote to quit if an immediate

referendum were held.



The prime minister's enthusiastic endorsement of an EU trade deal, which will be

negotiated with the US by the EU as a whole, stood in marked contrast to the

intervention by Gove, who said Britain could prosper outside the EU.



Dozens of Tory MPs are preparing to vote in favour of a backbench amendment to

the motion welcoming the Queen's speech, which is expected on Wednesday,

regretting the absence of an in/out referendum on Britain's EU membership.



The remarks by Gove, described as "unhelpful" by party officials, went slightly

further than Hammond, who said that it was "defeatist" to argue in favour of

withdrawal because the prime minister would negotiate a better deal for Britain.



Gove told the Andrew Marr Show on BBC1 that he would abstain in the vote after

No 10 said ministers would be free to take the rare step of declining to offer

support for the Queen's speech. No 10 is offering backbenchers a free vote and

ministers the right to abstain.



The prime minister says that, if elected with a majority in 2015, he would hold

a referendum by 2017. This would take place after a renegotiation of Britain's

membership terms.



Friends of Gove told the Mail on Sunday last year he had said Britain should

leave the EU unless substantial powers were repatriated. Asked whether he stood

by those private remarks, he said: "Yes, I'm not happy with our position in the

EU."



Gove said he supported the plan to renegotiate the terms of Britain's EU

membership after the election. But he added that life outside the EU could have

benefits. "My preference is for a change in Britain's relationship with the

European Union. My ideal is exactly what the majority of the British public's

ideal is, which is to recognise the current situation is no good, to say that

life outside would be perfectly tolerable, we could contemplate it, there would

be certain advantages.



"But the best deal for Europe, and for Britain, would be if Britain were to lead

the change that Europe needs." Explaining his abstention, he said: "I'm going to

abstain . . . it's an exercise in letting off steam."



Hammond, interviewed for Pienaar's Politics on BBC radio, said: "If the choice

is between a European Union written exactly as it is today and not being a part

of that then I have to say that I'm on the side of the argument that Michael

Gove has put forward."



Theresa May, the home secretary, said she too would abstain. But she declined to

say whether she would vote to leave the EU if a referendum were held now. The

prime minister will be in the US when the Commons vote is held.



Yesterday, Boris Johnson backed Tory backbench demands for an EU referendum bill

and warned Cameron he must make it clear Britain is "ready to walk away" unless

its relationship is fundamentally reformed,



But the mayor of London also suggested that leaving the EU would expose the idea

that most of Britain's problems are self-inflicted. "If we left the EU, we would

end this sterile debate, and we would have to recognise that most of our

problems are not caused by 'Bwussels', but by chronic British short-termism,

inadequate management, sloth, low skills, a culture of easy gratification and

underinvestment in both human and physical capital and infrastructure," Johnson

wrote in his Daily Telegraph column.



"Why are we still, person for person, so much less productive than the Germans?

That is now a question more than a century old, and the answer is nothing to do

with the EU. In or out of the EU, we must have a clear vision of how we are

going to be competitive in a global economy."



Ministers have been excluded from a free vote granted to Tory backbenchers to

support the rebel amendment - with about 100 MPs expected to take the rare step

of formally criticising their own government's legislative programme.



Cameron will show he believes Britain's long-term future lies in the EU by

saying at the meeting with Obama that next month's G8 summit must launch

negotiations on the EU-US free trade area. .



