





David Cameron won overwhelming support last night from the Conservative 1922

backbench committee when MPs from across the party rallied behind his pledge to

hold an in-out referendum on Britain's membership of the EU by 2017.



Tory pro-Europeans, Eurosceptics and opponents of the EU praised Cameron for

spelling out in clear terms the exact timing of the referendum in 2017 and the

form it will take - a straightforward in-out choice.



Bernard Jenkin, the veteran Eurosceptic, told the Guardian: "This is a very

significant moment. The commitment to the referendum is historic. There are

unanswered questions but nothing should dwarf the significance of this. The

speech sets out some very important principles about the importance of national

parliaments, the importance of legitimacy and the repudiation of ever closer

union is very significant."



Behind the shows of unity, however, senior Conservatives issued a series of

warnings to Downing Street last night about the pitfalls for Cameron over the

next five years.



Ian Birrell, his former speechwriter, described the speech in a blog on the

ConservativeHome website as "padding wrapped around a stick of political

dynamite". Writing of Cameron's pledge to hold an in-out referendum, Birrell

said: "Mr Cameron has been forced to concede possibly the biggest gamble of his

prime ministerial career. This is not throwing a slab of red meat to the right -

it is giving them the keys to the abattoir."



Senior Eurosceptics illustrated Birrell's point by signalling when they made

clear that the party would split, with up to 20% of its MPs campaigning for a no

vote in the referendum, if the prime minister wins only "token" concessions in a

renegotiation of Britain's membership terms.



One Tory said: "If the prime minister does a token renegotiation and comes back

and says: 'Well I've got hospital doctors off the hook' and it is a great game

set and match - a John Major situation with Maastricht - most of the

Conservative party would go awol. The Conservative party is happy that we are

getting a vote but it is not focusing on what the substance of the position will

be."



One prominent pro-European took a different view as he hailed the speech as a

sign of the prime minister's commitment to the EU. Robert Buckland tweeted: "A

clear and passionate commitment to continued EU membership from @David-Cameron.

Britain has a vital role to play in Europe."



Lord Ashcroft, the former Tory deputy chairman, warned that the party could

actually diminish its chances of winning the 2015 general election if it allows

Europe to dominate its campaign. Ashcroft wrote on the ConservativeHome website:

"Tories must remember that we can only get what we want once we win an election.

The more we talk about changing our relationship with Europe, the less likely it

is to happen."



The prime minister is aware that the path towards the referendum will not be

easy. While he is an instinctive Eurosceptic he knows the dangers of allowing

the party to be defined by Europe after he was first elected to parliament in

the party's disastrous 2001 election which was dominated by William Hague's Keep

the Pound campaign. In his first party conference speech as leader in 2006,

Cameron famously said: "While parents worried about childcare, getting the kids

to school, balancing work and family life - we were banging on about Europe."



But Cameron left Downing Street for the World Economic Forum in Davos with two

clear thoughts. First, he believes Ed Miliband walked into a trap by rejecting

his in-out referendum, a position Labour compounded by suggesting that this was

not definitive. Second, he believes the party will be broadly united over Europe

in the run up, and through, the 2015 general election.



One senior Eurosceptic, who was consulted by Cameron as he finalised his speech,

said: "The prime minister ticked a series of boxes in his speech. No to ever

closer union - tick. Yes to a clear in-out referendum - tick. Yes to a return to

a common market - tick. And finally - how to be on the wrong side of history by

E. Miliband."



The breadth of opinion was reflected by one Tory who expects to campaign for a

no vote. "When I heard that the prime minister would say he will hold an in-out

referendum twice I thought fine - that's all we need."



Jenkin warned Britain would face a long haul in difficult negotiations. "It is

very significant that the prime minister has been explicit that (the referendum)

is in on the new terms or out. But there is a long way to go before we get to

that point. An awful lot of hypotheticals are being asked about what the

position of the party might be at that point which the prime minister would find

very difficult to answer."



