





David Cameron will today move to win over some of his fiercest critics in Europe

when he rebrands his January speech on the future of the EU as a project for all

member states rather an attempt to set out a "shopping list" of British demands.



Amid deep suspicion across the EU at the tactics of the prime minister, who

pledged in January to hold a referendum on British membership by the end of

2017, Cameron will tell the leaders of France and Spain that his proposals are

designed to bring the EU closer to all its citizens.



The prime minister will conclude his EU diplomatic charm offensive when he stays

overnight on Friday as a guest of Angela Merkel at Schloss Meseberg, the German

equivalent of Chequers. Merkel and Francois Hollande, the French president who

will host the prime minister at the Elysee Palace in Paris tonight, showed their

unease with Cameron recently by boycotting a British exercise to assess the

impact of EU laws across Europe.



As he prepared to travel to Spain and France, the prime minister reached out to

his European critics by saying he was not looking for favourable British

treatment when he outlined plans to hold an in-out referendum. In an interview

with journalists from five EU member states - including Suddeutsche Zeitung and

Le Monde - he said he hopes his proposed reforms, including changes to the

working time directive, would apply to all member states.



Asked which policies he would like to repatriate, Cameron said: "I don't want to

give you a shopping list. I think this should be a discussion across Europe

about how we make the EU more flexible, and how we make clear that powers can

flow back to nation states as well as flow forward to the EU. So I don't want to

put a list of powers; I think it's more important to (ensure) the principles . .

. that people talked about in the past, are more clearly established."



He said other EU leaders might benefit from some of his changes as a way to

tackle unease with the EU across Europe.



His remarks were designed to address the impression that he would like to use a

revision of the Lisbon treaty to repatriate powers. Aides point out that the

word repatriation does not appear in his speech. His interview was intended to

flag up a passage in the speech where he calls for EU leaders to implement the

Laeken Declaration of 2001 which was designed to create greater transparency and

democracy in the EU. The prime minister said in that Britain would demand the

changes for itself if they were rejected by other member states.



Cameron repeats his warning that it is important to respond to falling support

for the EU in Britain. "We need to recognise that consent for Britain's

membership of the EU and all the ways that it's changed has become wafer-thin in

Britain."



Cameron will find common ground with Hollande today, making clear Britain will

call for the EU arms embargo to be amended, allowing weapons to the Syrian

opposition. Germany is a supporter of the embargo.



