





Germany's president called yesterday for English to be made the language of the

European Union as he appealed to the UK to stay in the EU.



Joachim Gauck earned applause for his remarks, made in Berlin in a speech on

Europe's future at a time of rising German scepticism towards Brussels.



"Dear English, Scots, Welsh, Northern Irish and new British citizens, we want to

continue having you on board," he said. "We need your experience as the oldest

parliamentary democracy, we need your traditions, your sober-mindedness and your

courage."



He said that to encourage a greater sense of commonality, Europe needed a common

language as well as encouraging multilingualism. "I am convinced that, in

Europe, both can live side by side," he said. "The sense of being at home in

your mother tongue, with all its poetry, as well as a workable English for all

of life's situations and all age groups."



Appealing to Britons' sense of historical responsibility he emphasised the

formative role the UK had played in founding modern Europe by its fight against

Nazi Germany; if only for that reason, he said, the UK had an important role to

play.



"You helped to save our Europe with your engagement in the second world war - it

is also your Europe, and more Europe cannot mean a Europe without you. Only with

you can we tackle the future."



The remarks, which took up two minutes of his hour-long speech, followed David

Cameron's pledge to call a referendum on Britain's EU relationship, a prospect

that has caused much consternation in Berlin. Later on in the speech, which was

made at his Berlin residence, Schloss Bellevue, Gauck cracked a subtle joke

about the prospect of Britain leaving the EU, when he referred to the union's

"27 states" before smirking and correcting himself, saying to laughter from the

audience: "No, 28 of course."



Gauck used the nationally televised address to call for "more Europe" and

greater communication between members, but also sought to allay fears that

Germany was becoming too powerful and aspired to impose a "diktat".



"In Germany, more Europe does not mean a German Europe. For us, more Europe

means a European Germany," he said, adding that Germans had a very specific

relationship with and sense of obligation towards Europe precisely because of

their past. "After all, it was from our country that the attempts to destroy

everything European, all universal values, were unleashed," he said.



He pointed out that today's young Europeans "experience more Europe than

everyone else before you", and that they had become so used to travelling across

the continent without needing to show passports or change money, that they now

took those advantages for granted.



But, he said, at a time of crisis, the time had come for Europeans to have a

more active relationship with the union. "Don't ask what Europe can do for you,

but ask what you can do for Europe," he said.



Captions:



Joachim Gauck, the German president, said Britain's role in saving Europe from

the Nazis made it key to the continent's future



