





Angela Merkel created a small breathing space for David Cameron yesterday when

she gave a guarded response to his landmark speech on Europe, paving the way for

the prime minister to campaign in favour of an in-out referendum on Britain's

membership of the EU at the next election.



As most European leaders rejected Cameron's demands for a radical overhaul of

the terms of Britain's EU membership, the German chancellor indicated she was

open to negotiating a "fair compromise".



The intervention by Merkel, hours after the prime minister called for Britain to

be exempted from the EU's founding objective to create "an ever-closer union",

delighted Downing Street which had worked hard to brief on Cameron's speech.



He outlined the scale of his ambition to transform the terms of Britain's

membership of the EU when he cast himself as a modern-day heretic ready to

challenge the defining declaration of the 1957 treaty of Rome which founded the

EEC.



"We understand and respect the right of others to maintain their commitment to

this goal," he said of the commitment to forge an ever-closer union. "But for

Britain - and perhaps for others - it is not the objective. And we would be much

more comfortable if the treaty specifically said so, freeing those who want to

go further, faster, to do so, without being held back by the others."



Cameron did not set out his specific negotiating objectives but said "nothing

was off the table" as he set out a vision of a flexible Europe unlikely to find

many friends in Europe. He made clear he wanted repeal of the current working

hours directive, a clawing back of EU powers in fields of environment, social

affairs and crime, fewer EU commissioners and protection of UK rights in the

single market as the eurozone members strengthen their co-operation.



His demands will be tabled in negotiations if he wins the 2015 general election.

A new settlement would then be put to voters in a referendum by the end of 2017.



"I believe in confronting this issue - shaping it, leading the debate," he told

an audience at the London headquarters of Bloomberg. "Not simply hoping a

difficult situation will go away."



The speech delighted Tory MPs across the party, on a temporary basis at least,

and prompted Ed Miliband to harden his position when he rejected an in-out

referendum on the terms proposed by Cameron, riling some of his frontbench team.

But Tony Blair led an immediate fightback by pro-Europeans when he likened the

speech to the scene in the Mel Brooks film Blazing Saddles where the sheriff

points a gun at his own head.



Merkel gave a guarded response in which she was careful not to reject Cameron's

demands out of hand. "Germany, and I personally, want Britain to be an important

part and an active member of the European Union," she said. "We are prepared to

talk about British wishes but we must always bear in mind that other countries

have different wishes and we must find a fair compromise."



German officials made clear Merkel's words were chosen to ensure Berlin would

not block Cameron from placing a referendum commitment in the 2015 Tory

manifesto. But Berlin remains sceptical of the Tories' tactics and is likely to

fight any British attempt to gain a competitive advantage in the single market.



EU diplomats and officials said Merkel, who is keen to keep Britain in the EU,

would drive the hardest of bargains amid acute concern that Cameron had plunged

the EU into years of uncertainty when the paramount priority for the others is

to recover from the euro crisis.



Other EU leaders lined up to declare there would be no "cherry-picking", nor "a

la carte" terms tailored to suit the British. Cameron's only whole-hearted

backing came from the prime minister of the Czech Republic while his allies, the

prime ministers of Sweden and the Netherlands, sat on the fence.



The French president, Francois Hollande, told his cabinet in Paris that being an

EU member "brought obligations", according to an Elysee Palace spokeswoman. The

French foreign minister, Laurent Fabius, said: "You can't do Europe a la carte,"

adding mischievously that Paris would roll out the red carpet to fleeing UK

businesses if Britain quit the EU. "I'll take an example which our British

friends will understand. Let's imagine Europe is a football club and you join.

Once you're in it you can't say: 'Let's play rugby'."



Cameron, who was greeted by ecstatic Tory MPs waving their order papers as he

arrived for prime minister's questions, won overwhelming support from the 1922

committee last night.



But senior figures warned that the unity could break down if France and Germany

press ahead with plans to create new governance arrangements for the eurozone

before the 2015 general election. Cameron is banking on a delay in any major

revision of the Lisbon treaty until after the election after Nick Clegg

dismissed his strategy yesterday. One senior Tory warned that up to 20% of the

party will campaign for a no vote if the prime minister achieves only "token"

concessions in any negotiation.



Captions:



Cameron said a referendum on Britain's EU membership would be held after 2015

Photograph: Facundo Arrizabalaga/ EPA



