





Europe is once again turning into a disaster for the Conservatives. The prime

minister is up for renegotiation and an in-out referendum: indeed it is his

idea. Implicitly, if renegotiation fails, we should leave. But as David Cameron

begins to realise the price of this promise in investment and jobs, he is

desperately trying to reassure business that he can win a plebiscite backing EU

membership.



The big guns are pounding. Last week a CBI report estimated that every British

household was £3,000 better off from membership, and urged that we stay. It

rejected a Norwegian or Swiss half-pregnant option where you apply the rules but

get no say over making them. Four-fifths of businesses backs EU membership,

according to polls.



On Friday Nissan's most senior global executive said his company would

reconsider its UK investment if we left. The company employs 6,500 people in the

north-east. These warnings could cost the Tories votes in manufacturing areas

where there are marginal seats.



The Conservatives, once the business party, are in the fevered grip of activists

who have no conception of what matters to the economy or indeed the electorate.

Ambitious Tory MPs know how to stroke their party's erogenous zones, which is

why the MP Adam Afriyie is playing games in calling for a referendum next year,

before the election.



On Saturday the Bruges Group, whose principal purpose is to keep a candle

flickering at the altar of St Maggie, held a conference in London entitled

"Which way out? How Britain can withdraw from the EU". The Tory right is busy

plotting the how, not the why.



This is lunacy. The EU is simply incapable of being the bogeyman the Tory right

and the UK Independence party try to put up. Its institutions are small: they

employ 47,500 people, 11% of the size of the UK civil service. EU spending is 1%

of EU output, or less than a 40th of total public spending. EU law is usually

mind-bogglingly technical, and largely about establishing common standards.

Without that effort, differing consumer protection can block trade. Unlike any

other institution designed to tackle cross-national problems, the EU even has

elected officials.



Nor does the electorate give a toss. Our EU membership does not even rank in the

top 10 issues concerning voters. In an Ipsos Mori poll in September, just 1%

said it was the most important issue facing Britain, compared with 25%

specifically citing the economy. Even Ukip-Tory switchers worry more about

immigration and the economy than about EU membership. Yet Tory activists are

obsessed with the issue.



How can we explain this? The Tories are a mix of two strands. The first is the

whiggish, market-oriented and socially liberal strand. The second is the old

Tory English nationalist tradition: militaristic, authoritarian and xenophobic.



That English nationalist strand runs all the way through Tory history: the

archetypal leader in that tradition was Lord Salisbury. As a result, the Tory

party has always needed a foreign bogeyman: the French until the entente

cordiale in 1904, the Germans until 1945, and the Soviet Union until the fall of

the Berlin wall in 1989.



When the Soviets could no longer credibly perform the role of foreign threat,

who should volunteer but Jacques Delors, then European commission president and

a French socialist who proclaimed to the Trades Union Congress in September 1988

that there had to be a "social Europe". As the commission's campaign for its

1992 Maastricht treaty gathered strength, the Tory right had its enemy.



Boris Johnson, then the Daily Telegraph's Brussels correspondent, performed his

own walk-on role in the transformation by inventing an entirely new - and

largely fictitious - brand of journalism known as the "bent-banana story". The

story, in many guises, held that the EU was about to legislate some daft law

that would threaten a way of life enjoyed by free-born Englishmen since King

Ethelred.



In fact, the EU offers a prize that has been the objective of English foreign

policy since the Tudors. We were a small trading nation that wanted to stop any

domination that would close our continental markets. We spent blood and treasure

fighting the Spanish, French and Germans to achieve that objective. Now the EU

gives us what we always craved - and the Tory nationalists look the gift horse

in the mouth.



Pity the redundant Tory nationalist, because we live in a period with fewer

external threats to our existence than at any time in our history. But the need

for a foreign bogeyman does not depend on reality: it is a psychological urge

that tells you more about the person who holds those views than about the world.



This psychosis is a massive problem for Tory leaders. Cameron should have faced

down these demons in opposition, just as his hero Tony Blair faced down the

nationalisers with the abolition of clause IV from Labour's constitution. The

tragedy for the Tories - and for Cameron's project - is that he never did.



Worse, he threw red meat to rightwingers with a promise in his leadership

campaign to withdraw from the European People's party, the pro-EU grouping that

contains the sane continental conservative parties.



Cameron now lacks the courage to refuse more of the concessions that he began.

Like so many leaders before him, he is a sad hostage to the way he won.



Chris Huhne was a cabinet minister from 2010-12 and is a former Lib Dem MEP



