





William Hague was asked yesterday about the referendum on our membership of the

EU. Gary Streeter, a Tory, pointed out that the last time we had a poll on this

topic Mr Hague was aged only 14 and could not vote.



The foreign secretary replied: "I was only 14, although I had a big influence on

how my family voted even at that stage." This answer seemed to me to open a pit

of horror. A 14-year-old instructing his parents how to vote!



Mrs Hague: Come on, William luv, eat up tha' brawn sandwich! It'll make thee big

and strong!



William: Aye, happen as it will Mam, but tha's not tekking into account the new

pigmeat regime likely to be wished upon us by them Europeans and their fancy

foreign ways if we stay inside t'Common Market, as I still call it. Brawn will

be a thing of t'past, and Yorkshire folk will be forced to spread their Hovis

wi' pate, rillettes, chorizo and other foreign muck!"



Mr Hague, gazing puzzled at his son: Sometimes, William lad, I wonder whether

you wouldn't be happier if you stopped memorising parliamentary majorities seat

by seat, and worrying your head about subsidiarity and such soft southern

nonsense. 'Ave a few drinks wi' some of the lads!



William: Don't worry your head, father, I regularly drink 14 pints of ale a day,

a fact which will emerge after I become Tory leader in 1997! Now I must go back

to my room and rehearse for the keynote speech I plan to make to the

Conservative conference in two years' time . . .



Apart from this alarming scene, MPs were anxious about Syria and David Cameron's

plans to arm the rebels. Many are deeply anxious about this and are demanding a

meaningful vote before it happens. Mr Hague seemed unwilling to say outright

that such a vote would occur. Peter Hain pointed out that the Sunday Times had

quoted "a senior Tory source" who had said: "We will avoid at all costs a vote

as we don't think we can win it".



"There is no Tory more senior than the prime minister," Mr Hague replied, to

delighted cries of "Boris! Boris!" from Labour, whose members never miss a

chance to point out that the mayor of London is the only popular Tory left in

the country.



"One or two might think they are (senior to the prime minister) . . ." Hague

said, emphasising once again that there really is a clandestine leadership

struggle.



He gave a long answer that seemed to imply that there would be a vote, but

didn't quite say so. Julian Lewis, a frequently rebellious Tory, grumped that he

would like to have heard the word "yes" in that answer, but had not done so.

Then some Labour MPs thought Hague had muttered the magic word under his breath.



Gisela Stuart asked for the word "yes" be recorded in Hansard, which would in

effect commit the government to holding a vote. She was unlucky. The Hansard

writers record only what they hear, and clearly they didn't hear that.



Maybe it would have worked better if he had just muttered, "aye, bonny lass",

with a wink.



