





The Obama administration is making no attempt to hide its dismay over David

Cameron's speech and the prospect of the UK exiting the European Union, a move

which Washington views as undermining prospects for a united military and

foreign policy.



The White House reiterated its belief yesterday that Britain is stronger within

Europe but ducked the fresh opportunity to lean on Downing Street over the

issue, favouring more conciliatory language than in recent weeks.



"We welcome the prime minister's call for Britain to remain in Europe," said

spokesman Jay Carney. "We believe that the UK is stronger as a result of its EU

membership and as a result of having the UK in, the EU is stronger."



But asked about prospects of a referendum on EU membership, Carney would only

say: "The internal processes by which these matters are discussed are a matter

for local governments."



In contrast with a decade ago, when the Bush administration appeared to welcome

division in Europe, the Obama administration values a united Europe, not least

in sharing the military burden of being the world's policeman.



When Obama became president in 2009, leading members of his foreign and security

team proposed retilting the balance away from Europe, with the cold war

mentality of fear of Russia largely redundant, to the Pacific, to face the

challenge from China. Obama reiterated in the run-up to re-election in November

last year that a focus on the Pacific remained one of his priorities.



But his position on Europe has softened over the last four years, seeing a value

in an alliance that saw European engagement in various troublespots, primarily

France and Britain taking a lead in Libya.



Although the Obama administration pays lip-service to the "special

relationship", it has forged closer ties with Germany, to the chagrin of

Britain.



Matthias Matthijs, Washington-based assistant professor and European specialist

at the School of Advanced International Studies of Johns Hopkins University,

said: "I think the Americans are greatly frustrated with all this UK fickleness

on Europe."



There was no official response from the Chinese government yesterday, but

experts there said the spectre of a 2017 in-out referendum could damage Sino-UK

economic relations and unsettle Chinese business leaders who have come to rely

on Britain as a key player in Sino-EU trade.



The EU is China's largest trading partner - the two economies trade over £840m

per day - and as such, China's regional economic allegiances are clear. "If the

UK really exits the European Union, this will create some uncertainties for

Chinese business leaders," said Gary Liu, a professor at the China Europe

International Business School in Shanghai. Withdrawal, he added, could "create

actual cost for Chinese people to do business in Europe."



Chinese foreign policy officials would perceive a split between the UK and the

EU as a possible harbinger of closer ties between UK and the US - not a

China-friendly development, given a recent surge of distrust in Sino-US affairs.

"We all know that Great Britain is a special ally of the United States, and

Great Britain is also a very important country in the European Union," said Shi

Yinhong, a professor of international relations at Renmin University in Beijing.

"But if you abandon (the latter) identity, you will only have one identity in

Chinese eyes."



