





It has been said that in the original Holy Trinity of Tory modernisers Michael

Portillo is the Father, Michael Gove the Son and Francis Maude, the Holy Spirit.



Portillo has fled the field, Gove is wrestling with "the blob" of the education

establishment, but Maude remains, keeper of the modernising flame.



Yet a cursory scan of the announcements at the upcoming Tory conference -

crackdowns on welfare and immigration - might suggest this is not a golden age

for modernisers. The shadow foreign secretary Douglas Alexander claims the

conference will represent "the final nail in the coffin of Conservative

modernisation".



A tax break for married couples is likely to be one of the policy highlights,

the kind of traditional social judgment that was anathema to modernisers.



Driven to the right by austerity, his backbenchers and the threat of Ukip, David

Cameron has appointed the Australian pollster Lynton Crosby to run his 2015

campaign - the man who ran the 2005 campaign which Maude then went on

subsequently, as party chairman, to roundly criticise.



But Maude, in an interview with the Guardian, rejects any suggestion that the

modernisers have been routed. Crosby had been hired "very late in the day" in

2005, and so had to fight a particular campaign, Maude says, adding, "he is a

brilliant campaigner. He brings discipline, focus and clarity."



He also insists the basic tenets of modernisation are alive. "Any party that

ceases to modernise is a party that is going backwards. The Conservative party

has been around for longer than any other party, and it has been more successful

over the centuries than any other party and it's done that because it has made

itself relevant to Britain as it is. We fail when we become backward looking,

and don't seem to be in tune with particularly how younger people see their

lives and see the country they want to live in. So if we cease to be a party in

tune with contemporary Britain, that's a problem. That's why modernisation is

not something about realigning the Conservative party's principles, it is simply

about making it current and making it contemporary."



He adds: "It has never been about ideology", or shifting to the left. He points

out that ever since his days as junior Thatcherite minister he has been a fiscal

Conservative, a realistic eurosceptic and in favour of open markets. "The

direction in which I guess I have moved is that I am definitely more socially

liberal today, but that is the direction in which the country has moved. If the

Conservative party were to lag behind the movement in social attitudes then that

is a problem for us, but I am happy to say I don't think we have."



So, in that context, is a marriage tax allowance a step back? Maude denies the

plan is illiberal, or that, through the tax system, the party judges one form of

relationship as superior to another.



He points out that when Cameron first made the pledge to reward marriage at the

2006 Tory conference, he won applause for saying "it would apply to a marriage

between a man and a woman, a man and a man, and a woman and a woman . . .

marriage is one of the institutions that creates glue in society and it makes

sense to recognise that".



The value of the marriage tax allowance, he argued, was not about signifying

relationships outside marriage were inferior, but simply in its practical impact

on social bonds.



Yet it has been just these cultural issues that have recently caused the party

so much grief, notably legalising gay marriage. Maude was one of the clearest

Tory advocates of the reform. Opponents claim the change has probably the single

biggest reason for an exodus of Tory members to Ukip.



Yet Maude is unrepentant, describing Ukip as out of touch with modern Britain.

The best response to the Ukip threat, he argues, lies in talking about what the

Conservatives will do on immigration and an EU referendum.



"We need to spend our time telling people what we're about rather than what Ukip

are about. For those people who are understandably concerned about Europe, we

need to stress there is only one way to be sure of a referendum on Europe and

that is to have a Conservative-led government. If they are concerned about

immigration, immigration soared out of control under Labour and has been cut by

a third under the coalition."



He insists that when it comes to the general election, voters will focus on the

fact that if they vote Ukip, they will get Ed Miliband. He is equally dismissive

about the Liberal Democrats, saying their main selling point is their ability to

say "no".



But is he concerned that somehow the Labour leader, with his populist attack on

the energy companies, has skillfully grabbed the cost-of-living agenda. Gove, on

BBC Question Time on Thursday night, praised Miliband for raising the issue, and

- in a line apparently dictated by Downing Street - took a critical view of the

big six energy companies.



But Maude is scathing about Miliband's speech declaring his energy bill price

freeze plan. He says: "It could have been a speech written by Len McClusky (the

Unite general secretary) and I think the issue for Labour is whether Ed Miliband

is a strong enough leader to stand up to the unions? He's talked tough but

actually when it came to it, he didn't stick with it and this was a Len McClusky

speech".



The 20-month price freeze was "a policy not properly thought through . . . the

biggest rise in energy prices was on Ed Miliband's watch".



That does not mean he thinks the energy firms are above reproach, but says the

answer lies in greater competition.



The long-term key to Tory success, he argues, remains the same as in 2005 when

he presented his party with slides showing voters liked Tory policies when

tested blind, but once they were ascribed to the Tories, support fell away. "We

need to ensure that voters wish to ascribe authentic and good motives to the

Conservatives."



