





Critics of parliament complain it is too slow to engage with topical issues.

Nonsense. Barely 12 hours after 114 Tory MPs voted to split their party in a

futile gesture over Europe, the Commons yesterday debated mental health.



No surprise that one of the first MPs to speak was Broxbourne's nice Charles

Walker. In a similar debate last year the Tory outed himself as a "practising

fruitcake". Not on Europe (though he does happen to be a practising

Euro-sceptic), but because he suffers from obsessive compulsive disorder (OCD).

Under stress the MP needs to do things like switch the light off four times.



For many of his Eurosceptic colleagues it is the same with EU referendums: only

four will do. Not for Walker, not yesterday. Like most MPs in the debate, he was

impassioned and persuasive about society's need to end the stigma of mental

illness.



The only unusual thing he did was praise MPs who interrupted his speech. "A

fabulous point" (Anne Begg). "A fine point" (Jason McCartney). "An excellent

point" (Norman Lamb). MPs can be quite kind when they think voters are not

watching.



Hardly anyone mentioned that EU rebellion. Like embarrassed partygoers after an

evening of spouse-swapping beside a home counties pool, they pretended it hadn't

happened.



In any case the day's Euro-drama was off-camera. It emerged that James Wharton,

29, the youngest Tory MP, has won the annual ballot to introduce a bit of

backbench legislation. Only the previous day he had warned his party against

obsessing about Europe. Now he was promising to introduce a bill to make a

referendum in 2017 as compulsory as a bill can when a) it won't be passed and b)

revolting Tories may lose the party the 2015 election.



Back in the real world less excitable MPs were trying to get greedy

multinational corporations to pay their fair share of tax. The PAC was in

session to re-examine Matt Brittin, Google vice-president for sales and

operations. At issue, the slippery distinction between British employees

"promoting" a sale in London and Irish staff (or computers) actually "selling"

it in low-tax Ireland.



Who says women over 50 are no good on telly? PAC chair Margaret Hodge gets

fiercer by the day. Half the size of ex-Olympic oarsman Brittin, but very cross.

Why? Because a stream of Google whistleblowers had been in touch to contradict

what he told the PAC in November about Google's UK salesmen (clue in the title)

not really selling



Would he like to retract anything? Basically no. It is all very technical,

clearly legal and shouldn't be. Dull? Detail? Nigel Farage would have been out

the door heading for his first pint within 10 minutes. But Chairman Marge and

her allies kept digging. "Why don't you call a spade a spade," said one MP.

Steady on, there's VAT due on spades.



