





If Angela Merkel is re-elected on 22 September, she will become Europe's longest

serving elected female head of government. Yet there is still plenty of mystery

about this woman who charted an unlikely course from research science in the

former communist East Germany to leader of Europe's most powerful nation.



1. Angela Kazmierczak?



Not only was her grandfather of Polish origin, the chancellor was almost born

Angela Kazmierczak. Her grandfather was Ludwig Kazmierczak, born 1896 in Poznan

- then part of the German reich. He emigrated to Berlin when Poznan became

Polish after the first world war, married a Berlin woman, and they had a son,

Horst, Angela's father. In the early 1930s the family Germanised their surname

to Kasner. Father and son converted from Catholicism to Protestantism -

something Merkel didn't know until recently - a puzzling discovery for a woman

who grew up in a rectory and whose faith is key to her personality.



2. Plum job



In her early public life, Merkel loved to brag about her cooking abilities,

especially her plum cake. The cake soon became a measure of how much time she

could afford her private life and husband. As a junior minister under Helmut

Kohl, she was still able to have two or three baking weekends each plum season.

The plum cake stories trickled away when she became chancellor.



3. Dog days



Merkel and Vladimir Putin go back further than you might think. He was a KGB

agent in East Germany when the wall fell. Merkel, the greatest benefactor of the

1989-revolution, got a taste of his intimidatory tactics very early. When she

first visited the Kremlin as chancellor, Putin gave her a plush toy dog as a

gift. Merkel has been deeply afraid of dogs since she was bitten in the

mid-1990s. The next meeting Putin let in his black Labrador Kony. Merkel sat

frozen, and pictures show Putin with a grin.



4. Inca hoots



Merkel sees similarities between the EU and the ancient Inca. Merkel fears the

European value system could also suddenly disappear without trace. Democracy,

liberal market economies, the western legal system are battling the modern

version of the cold war against authoritarian, non-democratic but economically

strong systems. Merkel has seen a state collapse in her lifetime. That's the

reason for her call to competitiveness and recovery in Europe - and she's afraid

Europe doesn't get it.



5. Easy Cameron, easy go



David Cameron sees himself as a close ally of Merkel. But the feeling might not

be reciprocated. She likes his policies, his global vision, his stands on

competitiveness and the Asian challenge and his debating skills. She is also

keen on changing the treaties, but only if there is a strong need. Losing the

entire EU system in one of the many referenda following a change would be too

dangerous. So Merkel is a fan of the newly discovered intergovernmentalism -

treaties between member states instead of ever more integration favouring the

commission. Cameron got a taste when he was asked to join the fiscal pact during

the euro crisis. He decided against. Britain is out. And Merkel couldn't care

less.



6. Euro plan



So, how does Merkel really want to get out of the euro mess? She has a plan,

written down in summer 2011 by an adviser. In it she accepts that key policies

within EU member states have to be controlled more closely and jointly to keep

the currency alive. Will that mean more Brussels? The opposite is true. Merkel

is aware of the public being tired of the commission and the lack of

accountability. So for the time being, she'd prefer national governments writing

the rules and sticking to them.



Stefan Kornelius is the foreign editor of Suddeutsche Zeitung and author of

Angela Merkel: the Authorised Biography, from Alma Books



