





Moves towards a resumption of Israeli-Palestinian peace talks were mired in

rumours, rebuttals, criticism and confusion yesterday in an indication of the

political and diplomatic swamp facing key negotiators and their mediator, the US

secretary of state, John Kerry.



In a high-profile dismissal of the embryonic process, Israel's former foreign

minister Avigdor Lieberman, wrote on Facebook that there was "no solution to the

Israeli-Palestinian conflict, at least not in the coming years, and what's

possible and important to do is conflict-management".



Naftali Bennett, economics minister, insisted construction on Jewish settlements

in the West Bank and East Jerusalem would continue, regardless of talks.



The comments by two crucial coalition partners are a sign of hostility within

the government over the agreement for preliminary talks forged by Kerry on

Friday.



Meanwhile, a veteran Palestinian negotiator, Yasser Abed Rabbo, denied that a

firm decision had been taken to enter talks, saying the Palestinians were still

discussing terms with Kerry. According to a Palestinian source, Kerry had

written a letter giving a US assurance that the basis of territorial talks would

be the pre-1967 border, but it was not clear whether the letter had been

delivered.



"If we have well-defined terms of reference and a clear time frame - by which we

mean the end of the year - we will go into talks," the source said.



Among the few formal statements of the day, the Israeli prime minister, Binyamin

Netanyahu, told cabinet colleagues that resuming the diplomatic process was "a

vital strategic interest of the State of Israel, first of all because we want

peace". However, any agreement would be put to a referendum, he added.



The Israeli president, Shimon Peres, congratulated his Palestinian counterpart

on "a brave and historic decision to return to negotiations". He added: "Don't

listen to the sceptics, you did the right thing."



Among the sceptics were Hamas, the Islamist rulers of Gaza, which described any

engagement in talks by the Palestinian leadership as a "betrayal".



There was no firm indication of when talks in Washington might begin. Kerry said

on Friday that if everything went "as expected" the first meeting would take

place "within a week or so".



The main sticking point continues to be the Palestinian demand that the pre-1967

borders form the baseline for territorial negotiations, a guarantee which Israel

refuses to give. If Kerry fails to persuade the Palestinians they have firm US

backing on the issue, talks may fail to get off the ground. There is also

disagreement over the timeframe. Israel is pushing for negotiations to last up

to a year, fuelling concern among critics who believe Netanyahu is seeking to

give the appearance of diplomatic co-operation while stalling for as long as

possible on any outcome.



Any likely agreed time frame will take the Palestinians well beyond the

potential flashpoint of the UN general assembly in September, at which they

could renew their efforts to become a member state of the global body, a move

fiercely opposed by Israel and the United States.



Both sides agreed to refrain from commenting on the negotiations. "Even people

closest to the (Palestinian) leadership know very little," said Ghassan Khatib,

former director of communications for the Palestinian Authority. "The thing that

bothers me is that it seems that the resumption of negotiations is seen as an

objective in itself. But the problem was never the lack of negotiations, direct

or indirect. It is the huge gap between Israel's stated position and its

practices, and the lack of willingness by the US to put pressure on them."



A Palestinian source said that the publication of EU guidelines on Friday

banning funding or grants to Israeli bodies with links to settlements was

"decisive" in persuading the Palestinians to take the first steps back to

negotiations.



Meanwhile, Tzipi Livni, Israel's justice minister and representative in the

Kerry-brokered talks, has urged the EU to designate the Lebanese militant group

Hezbollah as a terrorist organisation. Writing in the Guardian, Livni says: "A

firm distinction between legitimate, non-violent political parties and terrorist

organisations is crucial for the survival of freedom, democracy and moderation.

The clear message must be sent to extremists that violence and terrorism is

unacceptable and contradictory to our values, and that legitimacy can only be

gained through the repudiation of violence."



