





That British politics is enduring a period of public disdain is hardly in doubt

- although it is worth noting, in passing, that in a recent poll only one voter

in eight actually regards the political system as "completely broken". What to

do about rectifying the undoubtedly disturbing level of public unhappiness about

politics is more debatable - and ought to be widely debated. In this context,

however, there are two contrasting ways of looking at the five hours yesterday

that the Commons spent debating amendments to James Wharton's European Union

(referendum) bill, which obliges the government to hold an EU referendum by the

end of 2017.



One view, passionately held on the Conservative backbenches and in parts of the

Tory tribe, is that "giving the people a say" on Britain's membership of the EU

is precisely the sort of move that can restore public trust in politics in

general, and the Tory party in particular. The alternative view, pithily

expressed by Ed Miliband, is that five hours talking about Europe rather than

the cost of living is exactly the sort of thing that brings politics into

disrepute. It was a display, the Labour leader said, of the Tory party talking

to itself about Europe when the real issues facing the country lie elsewhere.



In that particular argument, this newspaper sides with Mr Miliband. The EU

referendum is undoubtedly a massive issue for many Tories, principally among

those who crave the opportunity to vote No to Europe. It is also a major

tactical issue across the party more generally as MPs seek to minimise the Ukip

effect in their constituencies in 2014-15. And Europe also has a toxic internal

significance as the party begins to contemplate its next leadership election

when David Cameron steps down, whenever that happens. Would-be successors are

already jockeying to appeal to party activists on Europe as a way of promoting

their leadership credentials. That process is likely to continue, whatever the

political circumstances.



Most other people, by contrast, rank Europe low on the list of agenda issues.

They are entirely logical and right to do so. When set alongside pressing issues

such as the economy, fairness, public spending, climate change, the state of the

schools and the health service, or even immigration, the EU relationship is

simply a less immediately important question, especially when the UK is not part

of the eurozone. The Tory party's preoccupation with Europe is a damaging

distraction. It is in some ways like the US Republican Tea Party's preoccupation

with reducing the size of the federal government - a collective obsession which

casts genuine doubt on their fitness to govern wisely in the national interest



This is absolutely not to say that everything in the European garden is rosy. No

one across the 28 member states can possibly pretend this is the case. Europe

remains economically unequal, with its fragile recovery underscored by the ECB's

interest rate reduction this week. It continues to grapple with its financial

and governance problems but not resolve them. It struggles to make its weight

felt in the world. It needs to deliver better. To that end it needs to be more

realistic about priorities, not least in the sobering absence of a new German

government and with Euroscepticism on the rise in many countries and likely to

be reflected in the European parliament elections next May.



European reform is a necessary task, not a hopeless one. Good political

leadership would stress the importance of Britain being engaged in these

processes, rather than pretending that withdrawal offers a serious alternative -

as Nissan's warnings yesterday underline. Both sides of industry grasp this more

clearly than the flag-waving political or media classes do. The Tory party does

itself no favours by the way it handles the EU issue. In one sense, that's fine

by us. But the Tory party's actions are harming the country, and that is not

fine at all.



