





The Conservatives accused Labour of trying to "gag the British people" yesterday

as opposition MPs used parliamentary guerrilla tactics to slow - but not block -

the passage of the Tory-endorsed backbench EU referendum bill through the House

of Commons.



After five hours of debate MPs managed to complete votes on just one of the four

groups of amendments tabled at the bill's report stage. MPs will resume the

debate on Friday 22 November and, with other backbench bills being held back,

James Wharton, the bill's sponsor, is hopeful that the bill will eventually

clear the Commons and get to the House of Lords.



In an unusual move for backbench legislation, Conservative MPs have been under a

three-line whip to support it, and Wharton praised his colleagues for their

"disciplined" approach in the chamber where, in an effort to speed up

proceedings, Conservatives kept their contributions to a minimum.



But although there were relatively few Labour MPs in the chamber - leader Ed

Miliband issued a statement saying the party was focusing on the "cost of living

crisis" instead - those Labour MPs present deployed tactics to drag out

proceedings. There were lengthy speeches from backbenchers such as Peter Hain,

Willie Bain and Mike Gapes (who tabled 57 amendments), copious interventions,

the calling of a division even though not a single MP voted against the proposal

and delays in the division lobbies, prompting Tory whip Claire Perry to accuse

Labour MPs on Twitter of "playing silly buggers".



Labour has criticised David Cameron's plan, which the Wharton bill would write

into law, to hold a referendum in 2017 on the grounds that announcing one so far

ahead creates uncertainty. Miliband has not ruled out supporting a referendum,

but is not expected to clarify his position until nearer the election.



Conservative MPs interpreted the filibustering as a deliberate attempt to deny

the electorate a vote on Europe. "There are some MPs on the Labour benches and

the Liberal Democrats who don't want to give people a choice on our membership

of the European Union," Wharton said. "We're going to do everything we can to

stop that from happening."



Adam Afriyie, another Conservative backbencher, said: "Labour are determined to

gag the British people."



During the debate Afriyie refused calls from his Tory colleagues to drop his

amendment to the bill calling for the referendum to be held in October 2014.



Leader comment, page 56 >=



James Wharton said: 'There are some Labour and Lib Dem MPs who don't want to

give people a choice on EU membership'



