





David Cameron took a swipe at Starbucks last night as he promised that making

business pay its fair share would be one of three key aims of Britain's G8

presidency.



"Companies need to wake up and smell the coffee, because the customers who buy

from them have had enough," the prime minister told business leaders at the

World Economic Forum in Davos.



Protesters targeted Starbucks branches last year after it admitted it had paid

just £8.6m in UK corporation tax over the past 14 years. The firm subsequently

promised to pay £20m over two years.



Cameron's speech attracted strong criticism from the body that represents

Britain's accountants, but the PM insisted he was the most "pro-business leader"

one could find. He said it was not just NGOs that had been lobbying him to crack

down on tax-dodging firms, but the upper echelons of the City too. "It's a world

where some companies navigate around legitimate tax systems - and even low tax

rates - with an army of clever accountants."



There was nothing wrong with sensible tax planning, but "some forms of avoidance

have become so aggressive that I think it's time to call for more responsibility

and for governments to act accordingly".



He said: "In the UK we've already committed hundreds of millions into this

effort - but acting alone has its limits. Clamp down in one country and the

travelling caravan of lawyers, accountants and financial gurus just moves on

elsewhere. We need to act together at the G8."



John Christensen, of the Tax Justice Network, welcomed Cameron's stress on

beating tax avoidance but said: "It depends on the details. We need a complete

root and branch reform of how companies are taxed. How do you tax companies when

they live outside the nation state, in the ether, and can move their profits to

where they pay the least tax?"



Michael Izza, chief executive of the ICAEW, which represents accountants, and

was in the audience at Davos, said he was disappointed to hear the prime

minister "again dismiss accountants, this time as an 'army' of avoiders".



"We don't recognise that description. Our members do not support illegal tax

evasion or the kind of aggressive tax avoidance that we believe to be unethical.

In fact, an effective accountancy and finance profession can and does help solve

many of the problems the prime minister wants to address."



A Starbucks spokesperson said: "Starbucks agrees that all businesses should pay

their fair share. We employ 9,000 people in the UK, create nearly £300m worth of

annual economic impact and are forgoing tax deductions that will ensure the UK

exchequer is £10m better off in each of the next two years." The company last

night announced quarterly global profits of $432m (£274m). In a conference call

with analysts, Starbucks chief Howard Schultz and senior executives avoided

mentioning the prime minister's comments.



There were concerns from other business leaders last night that additional rules

over reporting tax could add to red tape for firms or make the UK less

competitive than other countries.



Cameron used his speech to lay out his agenda for the G8 summit, which will be

held in June. As well as tightening up the international tax system, the prime

minister said trade and transparency would be key priorities for Britain's G8

chairmanship. He attacked companies which indulge in corrupt business practices

in poor countries. Britain last occupied the G8 post in 2005, when Tony Blair

put aid, trade and debt relief high on the agenda.



Cameron said there was still unfinished business on trade and called for the

completion of a free trade deal between the EU and the US which he said could

add £50bn to Europe's economy.



Seeking to reassure business, he said: "I'm as pro-business a leader as you can

find." But he added: "I'm a low-tax Conservative, not a 'businesses should pay

no tax' Conservative."



He was proud that Britain was living up to its pledge to spend 0.7% of national

income on development assistance, but greater transparency was needed to make

sure the aid was well spent. "There's a long and tragic history of some African

countries being stripped of their minerals behind a veil of secrecy. We can see

the results: the government cronies get rich while the people stay poor."



Cameron said unleashing natural resources from developing countries for the

benefit of local people would dwarf anything aid could do - and transparency was

vital to that. "So we're going to push for more transparency on who owns

companies, on who's buying land and for what purpose, on how governments spend

their money, on how gas, oil and mining companies operate, on who is hiding

stolen assets and how we recover and return them."



Simon Jenkins, page 35 >=



Captions:



David Cameron and Angela Merkel meet at Davos, the day after the PM said he

would offer Britain an in-out EU referendum Photograph : Action Press/Rex

Features



