





Angela Merkel may be the only German politician with true global recognition,

but Sunday's vote appears set to project into the limelight a less familiar

political duo, whose views and temperaments would shake up Europe and wrongfoot

David Cameron.



Once the votes from the election are counted on Sunday night, Merkel may well

find herself relying on the centre-left SPD for a governing majority. And the

unwritten rules of German coalitions mean that junior coalition partner bigwigs

get heavyweight roles - either foreign minister or finance minister.



Step forward Sigmar Gabriel and Frank-Walter Steinmeier, two SPD stalwarts with

pro-European credentials who could jeopardise Cameron's strategy of

renegotiating Britain's relationship with the EU ahead of a referendum. One

party insider insists that the Social Democrats would "actively try to block

attempts to return EU powers to national governments", as Cameron has proposed.

A source at the foreign ministry said: "Any attempt to cherry-pick EU policies

to keep or discard would cause friction with the traditional SPD line."



While Merkel has surprised many with her tolerance towards Cameron's "review of

competences" between EU and UK, a German government with Social Democrat

involvement is likely to take a dim view of "Europe a la carte", especially in

regard to social regulations such as the working time directive.



Steinmeier in particular is said to be a committed European with close links to

the French Socialists. The Social Democrats' failed candidate in the 2009

election, and foreign minister during the last grand coalition, he will remember

German frustration with British intransigence on Europe during the government of

Gerhard Schroder, for whom he was chief of staff.



Pressed on the subject, one of his advisers insists that he "has great interest

in keeping Britain in the EU", but it is worth remembering comments he made as

recently as December 2011: "I fear the decisive step for Great Britain's exit

has already been made . . . a process of alienation will become inevitable and

irreversible."



Temperamentally, Steinmeier could hardly be further apart from Gabriel, his main

opponent in a post-election race for the ministerial rank. Steinmeier has a

reputation as a bureaucrat who rarely loses his temper but also struggles to

raise the spirit of the party faithful. During his first stint as foreign

minister, he clashed with Merkel over the arrangements for Barack Obama's first

Berlin visit, but broadly he is seen as sharing her "consensual" approach.



Gabriel, on the other had, is what Germans call a Bauchmensch, someone who acts

on gut instinct. Aged 56 and a former teacher who was once nicknamed "Siggi Pop"

in his party, he is a impassioned orator and seasoned campaigner, who worked his

way through the SPD's party ranks and was responsible for the leftward lurch in

his party's current manifesto. He has openly called for the party to distance

itself from its "neoliberal phase" under Schroder. "Instead of changing the

political centre, the centre changed us," he said at the recent party

conference.



It is no surprise that the two men are said to share a mutual loathing of one

another. "I haven't joined his fan club yet," Steinmeier said after Gabriel

suggested the reintroduction of a wealth tax in 2009, and they are said to have

clashed after Gabriel tried to convince colleagues to vote against Merkel's

fiscal pact.



Yet it is Gabriel who currently has edged ahead of his rival in most

commentators' assessments. Christoph Schwennicke, editor of political monthly

Cicero and an SPD expert, believes Gabriel can lay claim to the vice chancellory

unless his party gets below 24%. Since the two parties would take turns in

picking their ministerial posts, Steinmeier would only be left with a minor role

and may decide to stay out of politics altogether.



Either way, observers in No 10 are advised to keep their eye on the SPD. The

last time the Social Democrats entered a grand coalition, they emerged with

their worst electoral result since the foundation of the federal republic,

mainly because the party was seen as getting on with Merkel all too well. In

order to avoid a rerun, many want a less cosy kind of coalition arrangement, and

will welcome the first good scrap with Merkel's CDU. A showdown with Britain may

just be what they are looking for.



Captions:



Sigmar Gabriel, 56, has steered the SPD to the left and is tipped to be vice

chancellor if his party secures 24% of the vote



Frank-Walter Steinmeier, a former foreign minister, has stated his ambition to

keep Britain inside the EU



By the time votes are counted in Germany's federal elections on Sunday night

Angela Merkel could find herself relying on the centre-left SDP to deliver her a

third term in office Photograph: Markus Schreiber/AP



