





Britain's most powerful aerospace, defence and security companies have joined

the debate over Europe in the wake of David Cameron's pledge to hold an in-out

referendum on Britain's EU membership, by warning that the government must

ensure close co-operation with its biggest trading partner.



The head of ADS, the trade association for major manufacturing names such as BAE

Systems, Babcock and GKN, will state that British companies are "at the heart"

of Europe's aerospace industry. The comments by Robin Southwell, the ADS

chairman, will be given extra credence by his day-to-day role as the chief

executive of UK operations at EADS, the Franco-German industrial conglomerate

that owns Airbus, one of Britain's biggest manufacturing employers.



In a speech at the ADS annual dinner tonight, Southwell will say: "As we debate

Britain's role in Europe in the years to come, what we should not question is

our role at the heart of the European aerospace sector. After all, if you look

at both exports and imports, the eurozone does more business with the UK than

with any other trading bloc. How many of you know that the UK recently overtook

France and the US to become Germany's single largest trading partner?"



He adds: "If that doesn't place us at the heart of Europe, then nothing does. So

whatever the outcome for Britain's role in Europe, we must ensure that we remain

part of the European economic community in protecting opportunities for

investment, partnership and growth in our sector."



The failure last year of the euros 35bn (£30bn) merger between EADS and BAE

Systems, Britain's biggest defence contractor, has stoked fears within

government and industrial circles that work on the next generation of Airbus

aircraft, as well as other big aerospace and defence projects, will drift away

from the UK. Airbus employs about 10,000 people in the UK, largely at its wing

manufacturing plant in Broughton, north Wales, and at its design and testing

facility in Filton, near Bristol.



Ministers and aerospace industry executives are drawing up a new strategy

document that is likely to include plans for an aerospace research centre, in

addition to the centre of excellence for aerodynamics announced by George

Osborne last year. The strategic update is being co-ordinated by the Aerospace

Growth Partnership, a body that brings together government ministers, officials

and UK-based aerospace companies including Rolls-Royce, the aircraft engine

maker; Bombardier, which makes plane wings in Belfast; GKN, the components

supplier; and AgustaWestland, the Yeovil-based helicopter maker.



British business leaders, including the CBI and the WPP boss, Sir Martin

Sorrell, have warned that the prime minister's promise of an in-out referendum

on the European Union in 2017 will create an atmosphere of uncertainty that

could jeopardise investment plans. ADS represents the aerospace, defence,

security and space industries in the UK, which are among the biggest employers

in the British economy. Aerospace and defence companies alone employ about

400,000 people in the UK and generate about £60bn for the British economy,

according to ADS.



Captions:



An A380 wing at Airbus's north Wales factory, packed for assembly in France



