





With the Sharif clan back in office in Pakistan and the Castros hanging on in

Cuba it seemed appropriate yesterday that one of Britain's own landed dynasties

should tilt at a great issue of our time. Up to history's challenge stepped

Nicholas Soames, through whose veins courses the blood of his grandfather the

wartime prime minister.



Admittedly Soames had decided to make his Churchillian oration during the NHS

stage of the debate on the Queen's speech and to do so on the tenuously

connected subject of Europe. But when destiny calls a Churchill, the summons

must be answered immediately.



Up to that point the debate had been dire. The NHS's new cheerleader, Jeremy

Hunt, made a complacent speech on the service's "heroic" performance in tough

times, as incumbent health secretaries must. Then Labour's Andy Burnham warned

how the arteries of our once-thriving hospitals are being clogged up by Tory

policies, as ex-health secretaries usually do.



But Europe kept barging its way into the conversation like a drunk in a pub.

Labour's Frank Dobson complained that the Tories have opened the NHS to

predatory US health firms via EU contract law, Thatcherite Tory Edward Leigh

asked Burnham if he would grant the British people a referendum on Europe. "Mad

obsessives," was the drift of Burnham's reply. What about the NHS?



So Soames's intervention came like a burst of Chopin's First Ballade (Opus 23)

during Britain's Got Talent. He even boomed in the unapologetically posh way

Etonians used to speak before rough trade like the Camerons were admitted. The

thrust of Soames's pro-European remarks was that young Cameron had made a

promise and that should be enough. His stated EU policy should certainly not be

challenged by the "prejudice or pub rhetoric" of some Tory MPs - no names - or

their "hysterical, kneejerk, publicity-seeking acts."



He spoke of trust and the integrity of government, of a momentous decision

affecting generations unborn. It was magnificent stuff and, like many of

grandpa's speeches in his wilderness years (1931-39), was received with

indifference and a solitary "hear, hear".



But Soames's speech certainly raised the tone. Two speeches later Labour's Ann

Clwyd silenced her chattering audience simply by reading letters from voters

about poor nursing care of elderly parents. It was shameful. Hospital buzzers

deliberately left out of reach, frightened old people left in pain while nurses

chattered about their social life. A man saying goodbye to his father before the

life support machine is turned off being asked: "Can we crack on now?"



It was bad luck the next speaker was Charles Walker, the self-styled "fruitcake"

Tory. After praising Soames he confessed to personal Euroscepticism, then said:

"I do want to crack on now." Watch out for the switch on that life support

machine, Dave.



