





Opponents of British membership of the European Union yesterday gained their

most prestigious recruit when the former chancellor Lord Lawson claimed the

British economy would be better off outside the EU.



Lawson said the profoundly misguided aim of the EU was to create a federal

European superstate - a United States of Europe - and concluded "that is not for

us". The EU, he said, has passed its sell-by date and has become "a bureaucratic

monstrosity" from which the UK should break free. After an association with

Brussels of 40 years, he said, "the case for exit is clear".



In an article in the Times, Lawson writes that as a result he would vote for the

UK to leave the EU if, as he hopes, the issue is put to the British people in a

referendum in 2017. Lawson, who was chancellor from 1983 to 1989 under the

leadership of Margaret Thatcher, has previously said any renegotiation with the

UK's EU partners would fail.



His latest remarks will embolden the growing Eurosceptic mood in the

Conservative party in the wake of last week's impressive county council election

showing by Ukip. It puts pressure on David Cameron to advance legislation on a

referendum on UK membership of the EU in this parliament, and even to hint he

will oppose continuing British membership unless he gains substantial

concessions in the talks he is planning with his European colleagues. Lawson

suggest Cameron will win no substantial reforms.



While it was "by no means assured" that Cameron would win the 2015 general

election, Lawson said he believed public demand was such that a referendum would

have to happen under Labour in any case. Dismissing the chances of either party

securing significant reforms, he said Brussels would fear a "general

unravelling" as other countries sought to match the return of powers.



"The heart of the matter is that the very nature of the European Union, and of

this country's relationship with it, has fundamentally changed after the coming

into being of the European monetary union and the creation of the eurozone, of

which - quite rightly - we are not a part.



"That is why, while I voted 'in' in 1975, I shall be voting 'out' in 2017," he

writes.



Lawson remains a respected figure in Tory circles and is seen as the great

reforming chancellor under Thatcher.



He insists there would be advantages in the UK leaving the EU. He writes: "You

do not need to be within the single market to be able to export to the European

Union, as we see from the wide range of goods on our shelves every day.



"The heart of the matter is that the relevant economic context nowadays is not

Europe but globalisation, including global free trade, with the World Trade

Organisation as its monitor."



"Too much of British business and industry feels similarly secure in the warm

embrace of the European single market and is failing to recognise that today's

great export opportunities lie in the developing world, particularly in Asia.



"Just as entry into the Common Market half a century ago provided a much-needed

change of focus, so might leaving the EU, an institution that has achieved its

historic purpose and is now past its sell-by date, provide a much-needed change

of focus today."



