





David Cameron won the support of one of the Conservative party's leading

Eurosceptics yesterday as it emerged that the prime minister will deliver his

long-awaited and once postponed referendum speech before the end of the week.



Liam Fox, the former defence secretary and one of the party's most vocal critics

of Brussels, said he had been briefed on the contents of the speech and was

"broadly satisfied" with what Cameron was intending to say. "If that is the

speech that is finally delivered, a great many of us will think that it's a

speech that we've been waiting a long time for any prime minister to deliver,"

Fox said.



Cameron originally floated the idea of using his speech to the Conservative

party conference last year to make a big announcement about Europe. Then a

separate speech was promised before Christmas. After eventually being scheduled

for last Friday in Amsterdam, it was postponed because of the Algerian crisis.



William Hague, the foreign secretary, said yesterday that the speech would take

place before the end of this week. The date and the time will be announced

today.



Given that tomorrow and Thursday have apparently been ruled out and the

publication of growth figures that could show Britain heading back towards

recession are due to be published on Friday, Wednesday seems the most likely

day.



Some extracts have been released from the speech, which will set out Cameron's

determination to renegotiate Britain's relationship with the EU and to put the

result to the people in a referendum after the 2015 election. But it remains to

be seen what he will say about the extent of the renegotiation he hopes to

achieve or the mechanics of the proposed referendum.



In an interview on the BBC's Sunday Politics, Fox, who said that he was bound by

a duty of confidentiality not to disclose the contents of the speech, said he

personally wanted to see Britain revert to a "basic economic relationship" with

the EU.



If Cameron failed to achieve a major repatriation of powers, Fox said he would

vote to leave the EU in the referendum that would follow.



"If the choice for me was between going in the current direction, which, let's

face it, is towards ever closer union and ultimately a greater and greater loss

of British sovereignty, my personal preference would be to leave," he said. "I

don't want to have ever closer union, I don't want to be European first and

British second."



Michael Portillo, a leading Conservative Eurosceptic in the 1990s, told Sky News

he thought Cameron was making a mistake in offering a referendum when he

personally was in favour of keeping Britain in the EU. "To commit himself to an

in-out referendum in the midterm of his next government seems to me to be

extraordinarily dangerous," said Portillo. "People like to kick their government

in the teeth."



Captions:



Liam Fox says he is 'broadly satisfied' with the draft of David Cameron's

speech, which is finally due to be given this week



