





Conservative MPs have been banned from teaming up with Ukip at the next

election, as Nigel Farage claimed more than 20 Tories would like to stand on a

joint ticket.



David Cameron was forced to rule out any prospect of local pacts or deals after

the Ukip leader gatecrashed the second day of the Conservative conference.



Despite drawing large crowds, including several Conservative MPs, Farage's

attendance in Manchester was overshadowed by a fresh race row.



Gawain Towler, a Ukip aide and MEP candidate, described a British Asian female

reporter as being "of some form of ethnic extraction" in a text message sent to

the wrong person.



However, the party shrugged off the incident as a mistake, Towler said he had

become "today's comedy racist" and Farage insisted it was "not meant

maliciously".



The Ukip leader was banned from the main conference venue and airbrushed from

the schedule, but several Conservative MPs pleaded with Cameron to "work

together" with Ukip to keep out Labour.



Their pleas came as the Bow Group thinktank suggested Ukip could be bigger than

the Tories within five years at its current growth rate.



One Eurosceptic Tory MP, Bill Cash, shared a platform with Farage and begged him

to "lay off" his assault on 60 Conservative marginal seats that could be lost if

Ukip's poll surge continues.



Cash asked Farage to stop fielding candidates against Tories as they should be

"allies, not enemies" given their common aim of having an EU referendum.



However, Farage dismissed this "hopelessly out-of-date, tribal" view, as Ukip

believes it will get enough Westminster seats to hold the balance of power and

demand a referendum in 2015.



He said it was not in Ukip's interest for Cameron to get a second term as the

prime minister treated Farage's supporters like "members of the lower orders".



He said no Ukip candidate would stand aside for a Tory, unless local parties can

strike formal "joint ticket" agreements with potentially sympathetic MPs such as

Nadine Dorries and Jacob Rees-Mogg.



The Ukip leader later said his "eclectic" band of supporters would be deeply

unhappy if he ever "sold out" by agreeing to go easy on Conservative candidates.



He declined to say whether he would prefer Ed Miliband or David Cameron to be in

charge, but said he had "some time in many ways" for Boris Johnson.



Farage's presence appeared to infuriate senior Conservatives, with Cameron,

George Osborne, Theresa May and Grant Shapps all forced to bat away the idea of

joint Tory-Ukip tickets.



Osborne said: "There aren't going to be any deals with Ukip and there are not

going to be Conservative-Ukip candidates locally. The only candidates who will

stand for the Conservative party at the election are Conservative candidates - a

sort of statement of the obvious."



Lynton Crosby, the Conservative election guru, also made it clear the party will

not respond to Ukip's offers.



Asked how the party would react to the threat of Ukip, he told the BBC in a rare

interview that there would be no change in policy as a result of Farage.



Boris Johnson, the London mayor, appeared to take Farage's presence in better

humour, as he joked "you kip if you want to, David Cameron's not for kipping".



One MP, Anne Main, stormed out of Farage's first speech, saying she would not

listen to "this rubbish" and accusing him of "party political stunts".



Others were much more interested in Farage's offer. Douglas Carswell, MP for

Clacton, wrote on the Telegraph website that he is "strongly in favour of Ukip

and Conservatives working together where they share the same vision of an

independent Britain".



Captions:



Ukip leader Nigel Farage canvasses for party candidate Glyn Wright in a council

byelection in Weaste, near Salford, yesterday Photograph: Leon Neal/AFP/Getty

Images



