





Once a leader who warned his party to stop "banging on about Europe", David

Cameron is now a laggard - running up the rear of his troops with a Eurosceptic

drum, which he keeps bashing a little too late. The January speech in which he

committed to renegotiation and referendum pretended to seize the initiative. In

truth, it was a nervy reaction to a restive backbench and an already evident

bump in Ukip support. Four months on, he has abjectly failed to deal with

either. Ukip is sitting pretty on 18% in the polls, and the parliamentary party

has entered a condition which one sympathetic observer said yesterday cried out

less for political analysis than for psychiatry.



Every frenzied demand to lock down or bring forward the promised plebiscite is

answered with more panicky political percussion. Days after insisting that

coalition realities precluded pre-election legislation for a post-election

referendum, Mr Cameron belatedly signalled a rethink about whether there was

something he could do in parliament. But if you seek to satisfy obsessives, it

is as well to be certain that you really can give them all they want. Mr Cameron

was instead virtually certain that he could not deliver. For, while his Lib Dem

partners have proposed an in/out referendum in the event of a new EU treaty,

they have no patience with a gratuitous vote. The PM was so resigned to this

that he did not bother raising a referendum bill with Nick Clegg before the

Queen's speech. After Her Majesty was mute on the subject, the malcontents

inevitably started mumbling afresh.



In the vain hope of calming the Conservative mood, Mr Cameron has tirelessly

improvised. In place of the familiar one-, two- or three-line whip, Tory

backbenchers will today experience the "profoundly relaxed" whip, effectively

licensing them to criticise their own government's Queen's speech. Ministers

will meanwhile be shepherded away from the voting lobbies entirely, for fear of

drawing further attention to the cabinet divisions laid bare at the weekend,

when Michael Gove and Philip Hammond let slip that they could happily live with

an immediate EU exit. In another departure, ministerial aides - ordinarily

expected to vote with their bosses - will enjoy a special free pass. Finally, on

Monday night, No 10 signalled the half-hope that a referendum bill, published by

the Conservative party rather than Whitehall, might wend its way to the statute

books after being picked up by some backbencher.



The procedural obstacles are profound, and Mr Cameron's real aim is less

achieving anything concrete than chiding Labour and Lib Dem MPs into voting

against giving the people a say. That is never a popular position to take, and

it is only because of Ed Miliband's steely concern to prevent his potential

premiership becoming as ensnared in Europe as the Cameron administration that

Labour has thus far held its nerve against the in/out vote. The Tory tactics

might appear sharp, but they do not add up to a strategy for the government -

still less the country. Most voters certainly would quite like a referendum, but

not at the price of a divided government, paralysed on things that matter more.



Mr Cameron started the week petitioning Barack Obama for an EU-US trade deal,

something he understandably regards as important - greater trade is one of the

few forms of stimulus compatible with his economic ideology. But there is no UK

trade policy other than that operated through the EU. The US president's gentle

words about the importance of getting the relationship between Britain and the

EU right could not disguise the farce of a prime minister lobbying on behalf of

a club which some of his own ministers openly wish to quit. Exasperation in

Brussels underlines the diplomatic price that Britain will pay. Mr Cameron once

led his party by challenging it, but today he meekly muddles through by

pandering to its obsessions. Weakness rather than argument provoked the change

of course, for the younger Cameron's critique of the Tories' Euro-obsession

remains bang-on.



