





So, in democracies the people elect their government, right? Well, not in

Germany. Two months ago, the Germans gave Angela Merkel's Christian Democrats

41.5% of the vote. Her nearest rivals, the Social Democrats, got 25.7%. However,

Merkel hasn't been able to get herself elected chancellor yet. She is still

negotiating with the losers about forming a coalition. And the losers are

dictating the agenda.



Welcome to proportional representation. This, together with the fractured nature

of the electorate, ensures that the composition of governments is decided in

backroom deals. Since Merkel couldn't gain an absolute majority, and since she

lost her previous coalition partner - the liberal Free Democrats, who were voted

out of parliament - she has to form a coalition with the Greens or the Social

Democrats, the very people she claimed in the election would ruin the country.

The Greens declined; the Social Democrats agreed to negotiate.



Second, welcome to Merkel's modus operandi, which is to let things drift until

the last moment. The coalition talks are to be wrapped up tomorrow, and still

nobody knows who will get what, and how much of the wish list the negotiators

have drawn up will make its way into Merkel's programme.



And third, brinkmanship. Sigmar Gabriel, the SDP leader, has promised his party

that the coalition agreement will be subjected to a plebiscite of the party rank

and file. It's a bit like David Cameron promising a referendum on EU membership

in the hope that this will force the other member states to give him what he

wants. Unlike Cameron, Gabriel seems to be getting away with it.



This means a tiny fraction of the electorate will decide whether we get a new

government or go to the polls again. And since the party faithful are more

radical than a party's voters, Gabriel has been able to use the prospect of

their rejecting the coalition agreement to put "social democratic handwriting"

on it.



It seems likely the agreement will include a minimum wage of euros 8.50; higher

pensions for non-working mothers and the poor; more exemptions from the pension

age of 67; rent controls in cities like Berlin, Frankfurt and Munich; and other

sops to anti-capitalist feeling. This may seem like good news for Germany's

struggling "partners" in the eurozone, as it will reduce its competitiveness.

And as it will put more money in the hands of pensioners, a splurge on handouts

also goes some way to countering the charges made by the European commission

that Germany is pursuing a mercantilist (trade) policy at the expense of the

rest of the EU.



However, the emphasis on money for pensioners, rather than for education;

handouts for retirement-age mothers rather than help for young mothers; rent

controls rather than innovative social housing - in a word on policies that

either cater directly to the grey-haired majority or reflect its views - is

symbolic. Germany may look like the strong man of Europe but its underlying

weaknesses are obvious.



Germany is ageing and shrinking. France and Britain will overtake it soon, in

terms of population. Too few women enter the workforce and they have too few

children. Germany is over-reliant on industry and underperforms in services.

Over half of every generation leaves school after 10 years, often with only a

rudimentary knowledge of English and similar cultural skills. Immigrants are

still not welcome. Most of these problems could be fixed with quotas for women

in senior management and for immigrants in the civil service and the police;

allowing dual citizenship; and encouraging kids to stay at school. But these

reforms are unlikely to happen.



No, it's not good news. And it gets worse. As part of his pivot to the left,

Gabriel has promised that the Social Democrats will be open to coalitions with

the Left party, the heirs of the East German Communists. Since the SPD, the Left

and the Greens already hold a majority in parliament, the temptation for Gabriel

to break with Merkel in, say, two years to form a "red-red-green" coalition with

himself as chancellor could become irresistible. And then Germany will be in

real trouble.



Alan Posener is a correspondent and commentator for Die Welt in Berlin



