





It takes a certain chutzpah for a relatively new MP to stand their ground on a

public platform with Peter Mandelson and to make the former business secretary

look slightly out of touch.



But that is exactly what Jo Johnson did when he dismissed an attempt by

Mandelson to goad him into criticising David Cameron's plans to hold a

referendum on EU membership.



Johnson, announced as the new Downing Street policy chief on Wednesday night,

sat calmly at a recent Policy Network conference at the Guildhall and never

raised his voice as he told Mandelson repeatedly that the "referendum genie" was

now out of the bottle and would never return.



Mandelson thought Johnson, one of the most pro-European Tory MPs of the 2010

intake, would echo the widespread criticisms of the prime minister's pledge to

hold an in/out referendum on Britain's EU membership.



Johnson, 41, is certainly cut from a different political cloth from the vast

majority of Eurosceptic Tories, including his older brother Boris. But the first

member of the Johnson family to secure a perch in Downing Street is a

sophisticated operator who is too canny to fall into a trap set by Mandelson.



The exchanges with one of the founders of New Labour highlight the area that

prompted many Tories to raise their eyebrows at Johnson's appointment. One Tory

said: "Jo Johnson has a cool intellect and is very civilised. But he is very

leftwing. He is very pro-European."



Even members of the shadow cabinet were surprised. One said: "When you talk to

Jo Johnson it sounds like he should be in the Labour party."



The prime minister is fully aware of Johnson's background, not least because

they share a great deal in common. Both attended Eton, though not at the same

time, and both were members of the Bullingdon club at Oxford. Johnson was a

member at the same time as his Oxford contemporary George Osborne, and looked

more self-possessed than the future chancellor in their famous Bullingdon group

photograph.



Johnson, who is particularly close to his older sister Rachel, is a strong

supporter of his more famous older brother. While they share the same

brainpower, they are contrasting characters. Johnson minimus - he is the

youngest of three brothers - appears not to have an ostentatious bone in his

body. They both married women who do not exactly hail from the Tory tribe:

Boris's wife, Marina, is a human rights lawer; Jo's wife, Amelia Gentleman, is

an award-winning Guardian writer on poverty.



Cameron has appointed Johnson because he admires the razor-sharp intellect of

the Balliol scholar who took a first in history. The most significant factor in

Johnson's favour is that he understands the challenge posed to European

countries by the emerging economies of India and China. Johnson, who served as

the Financial Times's bureau chief in Delhi, accompanied the prime minister on

his first overseas trade mission to India, in July 2010.



Johnson's writings on how to ensure Britain survives in such a competitive world

provide a mine for Tory critics of Cameron. The pro-European Business for New

Europe group, regarded with great suspicion by many Tories, provided Johnson

with £1,750 in travel and accommodation costs last April to help him research an

essay on improving links between Britain and India.



Captions:



Policy chief Jo Johnson has been described as canny operator who would not look

out of place in the Labour party



