





David Cameron will be warned today by proponents of a referendum on EU

membership that he is endangering the success of the campaign by taking an

overly party political approach.



A private member's bill offering a referendum in 2017, promoted by the Tory MP

James Wharton, is due to have its second reading on Friday.



The Labour donor John Mills, a backer of the referendum campaign, says in an

article for the Guardian: "The Conservatives have chosen to make their bill all

blue. One by one, Labour MPs who joined us in supporting the Labour for a

Referendum campaign have been rebuffed.



"Cameron's partisan meddling with this backbencher's bill has left many MPs from

other parties in a position where they feel they simply cannot support it, and

that means it will struggle to become law."



Mills is due to attend a cross-party press briefing on the bill with Wharton and

other Eurosceptic campaigners today. It is understood that some of them are

disturbed that Cameron is playing the bill for Conservative advantage rather

trying to build cross-party support.



In a sign of the prime minister's willingness to put pressure on the other

parties, Cameron challenged Nick Clegg to live up to a Liberal Democrat

manifesto commitment to support a bill on Britain's EU membership.



The prime minister, who confirmed that he would vote in favour of the bill on

Friday, joked that the deputy prime minister had the chance to support his own

policy "once again".



He was speaking in Islamabad a few hours before Danny Alexander, the chief

secretary to the Treasury, said Liberal Democrats would abstain from the debate

on the grounds that the bill was a "parliamentary stunt". But Downing Street is

so serious about the vote that it brought forward the prime minister's overseas

trip in part to allow him to take part on Friday. Tory MPs are facing a

three-line whip to support the bill.



Cameron has to rely on a private member's bill because the Liberal Democrats

denied him government time. The prime minister reminded Clegg that the Lib Dems

pledged to hold a referendum on Britain's EU membership in their manifesto for

the 2010 election. He declined to mention that they qualified the commitment by

saying the referendum should be held if there was a major revision of the Lisbon

treaty.



Asked whether he would be voting on Friday, Cameron said: "I will be there. I

think this is a serious effort by the government - sorry, the Conservative part

of the coalition - to get behind this bill."



Captions:



David Cameron has been accused by Labour of 'partisan meddling' over James

Wharton's bill backing an EU referendum



