





David Cameron risks making "premature" and "opportunistic" demands in Europe and

weakening Britain's power in Washington and other major capitals, the most

senior diplomat to leave government in recent years warned yesterday.



Sir Nigel Sheinwald, Britain's ambassador to Washington until last year and

before that the senior British diplomat in Brussels, said in a Guardian

interview that recent warnings by the US administration urging Britain against

staging a distracting referendum was "a conscious decision by the Obama

administration to intervene in the UK debate", reflecting a long-standing view

that it wanted its closest political ally closely involved in Europe.



In his first interview on the politically charged subject of Europe - and using

unusually candid language for an ex-diplomat - Sheinwald said: "If Britain is

active and influential in Washington that makes us more influential in Brussels,

Delhi and elsewhere. Equally if we are influential in Europe, then we have a

bigger impact in Washington and the other power capitals. These things are

mutually reinforcing.



"I just cannot see any logical basis for thinking a move to the sidelines, or

particularly a move out of Europe, would be anything other than diminishing to

the UK's capacity, standing, influence, ability to get things done and capacity

to build coalitions internationally."



Sheinwald also warned that in the eyes of the Americans the Cameron intervention

risked slowing the pace of European economic recovery. Nick Clegg spoke in

similar terms yesterday, telling Cameron not to create prolonged uncertainty

because of the damaging effect on jobs.



The prime minister is preparing to tell his Conservative cabinet colleagues

today of the European negotiating strategy he plans to set out in a landmark

speech in the Netherlands on Friday.



Sheinwald, ambassador to Washington between 2007 and 2012, is the most senior

diplomatic figure to urge caution on Cameron. He was also the UK diplomatic lead

in Brussels between 2000 and 2003, as well as chief foreign policy adviser to

Tony Blair between 2003 and 2007. He is now a member of the thinktank and

advocacy group Business for New Europe.



Sheinwald disclosed that US businesses were increasingly asking about Cameron's

intentions and expressing alarm that Britain, as the main gateway to European

investment, might be closed. He repeatedly urged Cameron to be cautious in his

speech. "British business has been disappointed by the failure of the British

political class to speak up on Europe for a long time, but they have realised

the debate has taken a dramatic turn."



He added: "We have sold investment in the UK on the basis that the UK is the

best gateway into the single market. That is the way we have presented

ourselves. American firms and firms from the far east have based themselves in

London for that reason. That has been such a success over the past decade or 15

years." Sheinwald cautioned Cameron against tabling demands for the repatriation

of UK powers, saying it is too early to know what the rest of the EU might seek

in negotiations after the European elections in 2014.



"To take the position some take here in the UK, which is our European partners

are going to be asking for the moon, and therefore it won't be surprising if we

put in a very large demand on the table - that seems to be at the very least

premature. In any event other members of the EU would regard any really

significant proposals by us to renegotiate as opportunistic, given the main

areas they are going to be examining are ones they would say are necessary for

the euro to survive and prosper."



Anything seen as an unravelling of the single market or the fragmentation of the

EU would be "a bridge too far". He added: "Investors are worried by the thought

that we are going to end up outside the EU by mistake, or without thinking

through the economic consequences or end up with an inferior model like Norway

or Switzerland." Philip Gordon, the US under-secretary for European affairs,

last week urged Cameron not to hold a referendum.



Sheinwald said the White House regards "another dose of uncertainty on top of

the euro crisis as deeply unwelcome". He added: "The idea, if there were an

idea, of going it alone being somehow appealing to our traditional partners or

to our future partners in Asia or elsewhere in the world has been undermined

very significantly by the comments made by the Obama administration."



Britain had succeeded in negotiations in Europe in the past 25 years, and there

would always be efforts to accommodate a partner. But he warned Cameron the

referendum promise "would not be regarded as a knockout blow . . . I certainly

don't think it will mean everyone will say 'fine, they have got a lock on the

negotiations, we have to give them what they want'. There is too much at stake

on the rest of the continent."



