





A leading human rights lawyer spends eight days in jail; the prime minister's

office is raided, six of his staff arrested and three computers allegedly go

missing; civil society groups warn of rising political violence and intimidation

tactics. Plus ca change in Zimbabwe.



Yet thousands of miles away that is not, apparently, how things look from

Brussels. On Monday the European Union dropped most of its sanctions against the

southern African country, the most far-reaching olive branch for more than a

decade.



This was in effect a reward for a "peaceful, successful and credible" referendum

on a new constitution and designed to encourage further progress. The EU dropped

its targeted measures against 81 officials and eight firms in Zimbabwe. Only 10

people, including President Robert Mugabe and his wife Grace, and two companies,

including the state-run Zimbabwe Mining Development Corporation (ZMDC), remain

on the sanctions list, restricted by asset freezes and travel bans.



The move comes after years of declining political violence and slow economic

recovery under a power-sharing agreement that followed the violently disputed

2008 election. Since then, with the world's gaze diverted by the Arab spring and

African coups, Zimbabwe has dropped down the list of crises requiring urgent

attention and begun to woo tourists again. Now the incident-free referendum and

easing of sanctions appears to put the seal on the notion that the country has

more or less "normalised".



Yet the unfortunate coincidence of the referendum with the arrest of lawyer

Beatrice Mtetwa, finally released on Monday, and six members of prime minister

Morgan Tsvangirai's staff, suggests that in Zimbabwe "normal" is still a long

way from ordinary. Mtetwa warned: "It is a personal attack on all human rights

lawyers but I was just made the first example. There will be many more arrests

to follow as we near elections."



Hardliners in Mugabe's Zanu-PF party are accused of ongoing abuses. Four rights

and advocacy groups have been raided by police searching for alleged subversive

materials so far this year. Activist Okay Machisa was locked in police cells for

almost a month only for the charges to be dropped.



Analysts predict a rise in intimidation before elections this year. "It looks

somewhat incongruous to lift sanctions in the context of some of the violations

that are continuing," said Piers Pigou, Southern Africa project director of the

International Crisis Group. "It's another episode of bad timing from the EU.

They said, 'If you have a good referendum process, we'll reward you'. They could

have put it in a broader context with qualifiers. They've been clumsy in the way

they've handled this."



Emily Armistead, a lead campaigner on conflict diamonds at Global Witness, said:

"It's a relief that the EU has at least maintained sanctions against state-owned

diamond miner ZMDC. Our research shows the company is involved in off-budget

financing of the army and secret police, organisations linked to violence and

intimidation in previous elections. We remain concerned, though, that relaxing

sanctions reflects the EU's keenness to see the Zimbabwe problem 'solved' before

free and fair elections have taken place, so that it can turn its attention

elsewhere.



"Now is a critical time for EU governments to do all they can to support

Zimbabwe's full democratic transition."



However, the relaxation of sanctions is welcome news to those who believe they

have long been counter-productive, gifting Mugabe an excuse for the country's

economic troubles and a rallying point to whip up anti-western sentiment. From

this perspective, Mugabe has just lost a major propaganda tool.



David Coltart, the education minister and member of an MDC faction, said: "My

view is that sanctions have outlived their purpose and were being cynically

manipulated for political ends. Often we see that when sanctions are about to be

lifted some appalling action is taken, which may help explain the arrest of

Beatrice Mtetwa. It happens too often to be a coincidence."



The new constitution was endorsed by Zanu-PF and the MDC, so serious violence

was never likely during the referendum. The elections, which Mugabe wants in

June, are likely to be a different story. "Although things have improved

dramatically in the last four years, there are still terrible things happening

in the country and there are still hardliners doing all they can to derail the

process," warned Coltart.



Few believe the elections will be as disastrous as in 2008 when some 253 people

died, according to an MDC count. The new constitution will be in place and

Zanu-PF is seen as less united. But its hardliners may have become more adept at

using intimidation without spilling blood. And it is still hard to imagine a

scenario in which Mugabe, who has ruled for 33 years, accepts defeat and leaves

the stage gracefully. As Pigou noted: "We are far from out of the woods."



