





Labour proposes a fresh crackdown on boardroom pay in a report released today,

which comes as the chancellor faces defeat in his efforts to head off a European

cap on bankers' bonuses.



The review of short-termism in industry calls for checks to end executive pay

based on short-term profits and tax incentives to encourage long-term

investment.



The report, prepared by Sir George Cox for Labour, represents the first serious

official thinking from the party on how to address City short-termism. It also

marks a new emphasis on industrial policy.



It comes as George Osborne goes to Brussels today in what looks like a forlorn

attempt to prevent the European Union from imposing severe curbs on bankers'

bonuses in the City.



In a highly unusual defeat illustrating the UK's deepening isolation in Europe

and the reluctance of EU partners to do Britain any more favours, finance

ministers of the other 26 are expected to endorse legislation to slash "fat cat"

bonuses.



The decision to limit bonuses ordinarily to a year's salary was made last week

at negotiations between the European parliament and officials from the 27 member

states. Despite David Cameron's opposition and Osborne's pledges to contest the

deal, it appears irreversible. The UK is unable to wield a veto as the decision

can go to a qualified majority vote if necessary.



Britain has been unable to muster enough allies to block the proposal. Its

likeliest supporters, Sweden, the Netherlands and, crucially, Germany have all

come out in favour of capping bonuses.



On Sunday, the Swiss voted in a referendum for even tighter controls on bank

pay, envisaging jail terms for those who break the new rules.



The Cox report suggests that the company governance code be altered so at least

30% of executive director remuneration be paid in the form of shares that cannot

be cashed in for five years or until after the director has completed his or her

period on the board.



It proposes a ban on voting rights for shareholders who appear on the register

during a takeover bid and says measures are needed to remove the tax bias that

favours companies funding loans through debt as opposed to equity.



In an effort to encourage so-called "patient capital" the report suggests

capital gains tax on shares could be tapered in a series of yearly steps from

50% in year one to 10% after year 10. The report suggests the measure would be

revenue neutral.



The report also proposes that all major infrastructure investment, such as

airport capacity, could be taken out of party politics so that responsibility is

handed to an independent agency that is accountable to parliament but

independent of MPs.



Matthew Fell, director for competitive markets at business body CBI, said:

"There is a need to encourage a more long-term focus from investors and the

report's recognition that industrial strategy should be a cornerstone of policy

is welcome."



