





'Tories: back to the workhouse." So screamed the front page of yesterday's Daily

Mirror, the self-described "intelligent tabloid". It's a commonplace that

politicians are divorced from the real world. But there's no bigger divide than

between the public, who see for themselves the effects of excessive welfarism

and foot the bills, and metropolitan commentators, who regard all welfare

provision as beyond criticism.



For too long growing public concern about excessive levels of immigration and

welfare dependency was ignored by mainstream parties. It is partly from this

void that Ukip has risen. It is a mistake to believe that the party is some kind

of provisional wing of shire conservatism. Ukip is appealing to voters from

across the political spectrum.



The correct response for the Conservative party is to address the concerns of

people who are anxious about their jobs and living standards. That means

distinguishing between disaffected voters and the demagogues who are appealing

to them. We need to speak for people who are worried about their future, not

against them. Policies to control immigration, reform welfare and reduce taxes

aren't a sudden response to an insurgent minority party. They are core to a

government that puts itself on the side - to coin the Conservative party's

conference slogan - of hard-working people.



But there are far more voters to win back who have moved to Labour, or away from

all parties, than to Ukip. That is one reason why the suggestion of a pact with

the minority party is so misguided. Nigel Farage complains he is regarded as a

"plague carrier" by Tory high command because he is refused entry to the

Conservative party conference. But it would indeed be political death for

Conservatives to open the door to him.



The first obstacle is a glaringly obvious policy difference. Ukip want to leave

the EU come what may. That is not Conservative party policy, which is to

renegotiate Britain's terms of membership and put a better deal to the public in

a referendum. And while Ukip now offers a small menu of populist, frequently

incredible policies, its gravitational pull is to talk ceaselessly about Europe,

which would be disastrous for Conservatives when Europe is relatively low on

voters' concerns.



There are other reasons to reject Farage's overtures. Ukip is an angry party. It

oozes a loathing of contemporary Britain. It is backward-looking and

isolationist. A bargain with Ukip would be Faustian, the opportunity of wider

appeal sold for illusory political gain. Like two bitter old bores drinking

together in a pub, no one else would want to talk to us.



It's true that the Conservative party needs to reach out beyond its core to

obtain a winning share of the national vote, but the overture should be to

electors in the north, to women, to ethnic minorities, to a generation who are

working ever harder for seemingly less reward.



This is the grand coalition that Conservatives must forge. At its most powerful

the party has appealed beyond the shires to the cities, to those who want to get

on as much as those who have already succeeded, to the young as well as the

elderly. It has captured an optimism about our country, rewarded aspiration and

challenged privilege.



The spring in the step of Conservative activists this week comes from a sense we

are winning the big argument about the economy. Ultimately a debate about living

standards will run best for the party which can offer a credible path to

economic growth, jobs and rising incomes.



Conservatives should realise that we have a powerful hand to play. We are

setting out policies which can speak to anxious voters and win them back. We

should not be deterred by shrill claims that to address the electorate's biggest

concerns, such as welfare dependency, is to abandon the middle ground. Nor

should we be spooked into any kind of deal with a minority party that would

drive moderate voters away.



Nick Herbert is Conservative MP for Arundel and South Downs



