





From a militant Conservative Eurosceptic viewpoint, it has been a terrific few

days. First, a cascade of serving and former ministers say they want out of the

EU. Second, David Cameron dashes to publish a bill committing the UK to an EU

referendum in 2017. Third, 116 Tory MPs nevertheless vote to regret the absence

of such a bill from the government's programme. Fourth, in the ballot to bring

in a private member's bill this year, one rebel, James Wharton, comes first and

immediately commits himself to pick up the PM's draft bill. Throw in a couple of

extra bonbons - Nick Clegg's admission that it is now a matter of "when, not if"

there is a referendum and the continued talk of Tory-Ukip pacts at local level

in 2015 - and it is clear that things are going the sceptics' way.



Many sceptics can barely contain their excitement. They have got Mr Cameron on

the run; his weakness as a party leader is palpable. Every day the Tory

anti-European cause makes another advance. The anti-European screw on Mr Cameron

seems to be tightening by the day. But there are two very big problems: first,

all this is dangerous for the Tory party; second, it is the wrong course for the

country.



Take, to begin with, Mr Wharton's bill. The bill commits the UK to an in-out EU

referendum in 2017. But the focus on the bill is misplaced; it exaggerates the

notice that voters - including those who are tempted by Ukip - take of what

happens in parliament. It overstates the priority that voters attach to the

European issue rather than the economy, health, education and immigration. So it

provides a platform for Tory divisions and obsessiveness.



Second, the bill is unlikely to become law. A private member's bill has bigger

procedural hurdles to cross than government bills. It can be talked out. It can

more easily be blocked by wrecking amendments. It needs to get through the

Lords. And without Labour and Liberal Democrat agreement - which is unlikely,

even though Labour has its own party management issues on Europe - there isn't

enough Commons support anyway. Mr Wharton and his backers may end up drawing

attention to little except their own political impotence.



Third, the failure of Mr Wharton's bill could have the opposite political effect

to the one its supporters intend. Backers hope that a strong Tory campaign on an

EU referendum will staunch the flow of votes to Ukip. But this may misread the

importance of the EU to Ukip's current appeal, which is based on a range of

other dissatisfactions, too. If so, it may provide a boost to Ukip's protest

vote rather than pricking its bubble.



If that happens, then the whole false logic may repeat itself next year. If Ukip

wins the European elections in May 2014, the Tory panic will be greater than

this year, not smaller. The Wharton bill could be revived - perhaps by the

Tories officially, or by another backbencher. But the Commons arithmetic will

not have changed. And the Eurosceptics may now find themselves erecting a

platform for defeat in 2015, not victory. Ironically, it is far from impossible

that the Lib Dems - most hated of all the Eurosceptics' foes - could be the

ultimate beneficiary of their obsession.



In the end, though, there are two larger reasons why the Wharton bill is

objectionable, not just in tactical terms but on principle. One is that it is an

abuse of parliamentary democracy to try to bind a future parliament. This is

legislation as a political pose, not lawmaking. It is reminiscent of New Labour

at its most bankrupt. It is up to us, the voters, what the 2015 parliament looks

like and what it does; it is not up to this parliament.



The other, even more fundamental point, is that this country should be in, not

out, of the EU. By all means have a referendum, as the law requires, if the

terms of the deal change substantially. But that's simply not on the table right

now. All our parties, including the Tories, would be much better occupied trying

to make Europe work for the voters, instead of endlessly scheming the collapse

of a union that, with all its faults, still remains central to the long-term UK

national interest.



