





Just about every American to have captured the White House since Nixon has

styled themselves as an outsider, riding into Washington to shake up a

discredited elite. Neither governing for the 1% nor even being the son of a

former president precluded this distinctive rhetoric, which has never gripped

Britain in the quite same way. Yesterday, however, Nigel Farage led Ukip on a

proudly upstart charge into the county halls of shire England. The BBC's

projected national vote shares implied that the political category we used to

dismiss as "others" - that is, Ukip plus the rest of the political fringe - was

top of the poll, while all three of the so-called major parties turned in dismal

scores.



A great deal separates Ukip's Little England nationalism from folksy American

posturing, but exactly as in the US it is as well to ask what lies behind the

rebellious talk. A man who gasps to defy the busybodies who prevent him from

sparking up in the pub, Mr Farage is the right man to sound the call for a

rabble army. But it is as well to recall that Ukip's incoherent policy platform

mixes fear-mongering about immigration with flat tax that would redistribute to

the rich, and that its avowed love of freedom does not extend to gay people who

want to get married. Neither Ukip policy nor its occasionally unsavoury

personnel are subjected to the same sort of scrutiny as the more established

tribes. Most of the hundreds of thousands who trooped to the ballot box to put a

cross next their local Ukip candidate were clearer about what they were voting

against than what they were voting for - and therein lies the dismal message for

the rest of the political pack.



The Labour party came out least bruised, outpolling the Tories where it mattered

- in those urban enclaves within the shires, from Lincoln to Harlow, which will

determine the outcome in 2015. To point this out is fair enough, but - in its

heart - Labour must also know that it is still not good enough for this stage of

the game. The party slightly undershot a mid-term poll rating which is already

too modest to make victory assured, and above all it failed to do what thriving

oppositions do and become the natural home for the great bulk of malcontents.



For the Conservatives, the bad news is less qualified. The direct upshot of

Ukip's surge, which draws disproportionately from Tory support, was the loss of

a worse-than-expected 335 seats, and a few previously true blue counties such as

Lincolnshire and Norfolk. The destabilising dynamics, which are the indirect

consequence, are even worse news for David Cameron. He will face enormous

pressure from that element in his party that hankers for a Ukip-style Tory

party. No matter the gamble he made at the start of the year - to counter the

Ukip threat with the promise of a EU referendum - is now a gamble that he has

demonstrably lost. "Double or nothing" will be the cry from the right, and

unless Mr Cameron can muster more strength than he has recently shown, he could

jeopardise the future of his coalition with the Liberal Democrats. His one

comfort is that his partners' (these days almost routinely) dismal performance

will frighten them off walking away and triggering an early election.



The Lib Dems imagine themselves as having nothing in common with Ukip, and in

policy terms that is true. Before they entered government, however, their vote

was similarly swelled by that element in the electorate more interested in

flipping the thumbs down at the agenda of those in power, than in endorsing any

particular alternative plan. As the slump leaves the establishment parties

offering different flavours of pain, the "none of the above" contingent is

growing. In the end, the substance of that will have to be addressed. In the

meantime, all three parties would do well to do away with alien and

infuriatingly upbeat talk of "aspiration", and engage with the grumpy tone of a

nation that is thoroughly fed up at finding that its pay packet is buying less

each year.



