





A Conservative MP is being sued by parliament's expenses watchdog after refusing

to pay £54,000 he is alleged to have made in capital gains on his publicly

funded home.



Stewart Jackson, the MP for Peterborough, is facing the high court action by the

Independent Parliamentary Standards Authority (Ipsa) after denying that he owes

all of the money.



The unprecedented legal case has been launched as 28 other MPs have agreed to

repay almost £500,000 they are alleged to have made in profits after months of

behind the scenes wrangling involving party whips and lawyers. Some MPs have

claimed, off the record, that they are being victimised because of years of

expenses abuses by their predecessors.



The watchdog moved to ban the use of Commons expenses to pay mortgage interest

in May 2010, in the wake of public fury about abuses. Transitional arrangements

were put in place permitting MPs elected before 2010 to keep claiming the money

up to last August - as long as they agreed to return any potential capital gain.



Some 71 members received about £1m in allowances for mortgage interest during

the period. Properties were valued in 2010 and 2012, and the MPs were given

until 30 November to return a proportion of any gain. The process was delayed

when some signalled that they were considering a legal challenge on the grounds

that the watchdog had overstepped its powers.



Jackson, a member of the public accounts committee, said Ipsa's legal

proceedings were heavy-handed and disproportionate and were clearly intended to

bully him into submission.



"The essence of the dispute is my challenge of the valuations of 2010 and 2012.

Ipsa are seeking a cash sum on a so-called capital gain 'profit' on my family

home, in which I live and have not sold. The money which Ipsa is demanding

retrospectively is more than the total amount I received when I was claiming

mortgage interest and the property is now valued at less than we purchased it

for in 2005."



Jackson, who resigned as a junior minister in 2010 after voting against a

three-line whip on an EU referendum, wrote that he would challenge the

watchdog's claim that his family home - which he bought for £470,000 in December

2005 - increased in value by 20% at a time when he says house prices in the area

were falling.



In total, the 71 MPs claimed £926,159.75 of taxpayer cash to cover mortgage

interest over the 15-month period, with the largest claims made by Labour's

Michael Connarty - who received £34,168 relating to a property in London, of

which he has returned £6,833 - and Jackson, who received £32,494.



A spokesman for Ipsa said: "One of the most damaging aspects of the expenses

scandal was the practice where MPs got taxpayer support to own a second home.

That is why we said we would stop this, and we have now done so."



Captions:



Tory MP Stewart Jackson is refusing to pay all the money, saying he disputes the

valuation of his home in Peterborough



