





David Cameron has been dealt a major blow after Angela Merkel and Francois

Hollande snubbed a special UK exercise to assess the impact of EU laws and

regulations on Britain and the rest of Europe.



In a sign of the prime minister's growing isolation in Europe after his decision

to promise a referendum on Britain's membership of the European Union, Paris and

Berlin are boycotting the British "balance of competences" review.



The decision by France and Germany is a particular setback to Cameron, who said

in his long-awaited speech on the EU in January that nothing should be off the

table in the review, which will examine every area of EU lawmaking.



In an attempt to show it has an open-minded approach, Britain sent letters to

the other 26 EU members asking for their thoughts on the impact of EU laws in

areas ranging from the single market to the environment. The letters, dubbed

questionnaires in Paris and Berlin, were sent after William Hague, the foreign

secretary, launched the review last July.



But France and Germany have decided to steer clear of the review because they

see it as driven by British politics. A French diplomat said: "This is a British

domestic political exercise. We have therefore decided we would not

participate."



Only a few EU countries have replied to the letters. These include Italy, run

until recently by Mario Monti's technocratic government, and Sweden, whose

centre-right prime minister, Fredrik Reinfeldt, is Cameron's closest ally in the

EU.



The boycott by France and Germany, which went to the trouble of co-ordinating

their positions at senior levels, will disappoint Cameron, who set great store

by Merkel's guarded welcome to his speech.



Berlin's decision to ignore the British review follows a clear private warning

from Merkel that, if re-elected in September, she would grant little of

substance to Cameron in his demands for a renegotiation of the terms of

Britain's EU membership before the UK's referendum, which the prime minister has

said would be held by 2017 at the latest. Hollande has been publicly dismissive

of Cameron's speech.



The Tories plan to use the review to decide on which areas to renegotiate.

Cameron said in January: "Our balance of competences review (will) give us an

informed and objective analysis of where the EU helps and where it hampers."



Whitehall sources are putting a brave face on the snub. One senior figure said:

"It is shrug your shoulders time. We are not put-out."



A government spokesperson said: "This is intended to be an open and transparent

process so of course we have invited other EU countries to contribute, and

indeed several have along with a number of international organisations, but we

recognise others consider this an essentially domestic review and have decided

not to."



The Franco-German decision shows how Britain has become isolated in Europe. The

foreign secretary had high hopes of co-operation from across the EU for his

review when he launched the exercise in a statement to MPs. Hague said: "The

review will be an outward-facing exercise, both domestically and

internationally."



The boycott will disappoint ministers because British diplomats across the EU

have gone out of their way to stress that the exercise will be even-handed.

Civil servants will submit reports to a three-strong ministerial team chaired by

David Lidington, the Europe minister, which also includes Mark Hoban, the work

and pensions minister, and Lord Wallace of Saltaire, the Liberal Democrat whip

and European affairs academic who is the party's representative in the Foreign

Office.



The ministers are due to receive the drafts of the first six reports within

weeks. These cover the internal market, foreign policy, development and aid,

taxation, health, animal welfare and food safety.



The senior Whitehall source said: "The letters explained our approach and said

we would welcome contributions. It was important to show that this is not about

putting together a list of demands that form a path to the exit route."



Captions:



Angela Merkel and Francois Hollande dismissed the UK exercise as a

questionnaire, driven by British domestic politics



