





Bridget Jones was never going to get a tax break out of David Cameron. The prime

minister believes in marriage, and he wants to introduce a married couples' tax

break to prove it. After much prevarication, owing to the political difficulties

of getting the policy through, Cameron is now bringing forward to the autumn

legislation to recognise marriage in the tax system.



So all you Bridget Joneses out there can now add to your list of grievances the

fact that you won't qualify for a tax rebate that your smug married friends will

be boasting about.



I know Cameron believes in this policy personally and passionately because I

once sat in the back of a car with him and listened to him nagging a

twentysomething female aide about why she hadn't yet found a husband. "We really

must get you married. Marriage is wonderful," he said, with great feeling.



It may yet be the case that in rushing out an announcement on this most

traditional policy, against the wishes of ministers including George Osborne,

Cameron shows himself to be in tune with the British people - who have a soft

spot for marriage and want it promoted.



Certainly, the prime minister has done himself proud recently by sticking to

instinctive Tory values. His stance on Europe and welfare cutbacks - both of

which Labour predicted would be unpopular - have won enthusiastic backing from

voters. Ed Miliband has looked out of touch in refusing to back an EU referendum

and by not having a cohesive alternative to counter financial austerity. Polling

last weekend showed the Labour party leader lacking the power to secure a

Commons majority.



But there is something about a marriage tax break that makes me doubt its

populist appeal. Perhaps because I am a singleton myself, I have deeply

conflicted feelings about financially rewarding "smug marrieds", as Bridget

Jones calls them.



I don't oppose it completely, however, because whatever the idealist Cameron

believes, a married couples' tax break is essentially a tax break for the middle

classes. The reason the idea has gathered so much pace within the Tory party,

which was poised to revolt if Cameron did not act, is because it is the only

way, in the current financial climate, the Conservatives can legitimately - and

with moral authority - get a tax cut through for "people like them". In

principle that is fine by me. The middle classes deserve a tax break. They've

been paying into the system more diligently than anyone else for years.



My problem is that if you want to give middle Britons some of their hard-earned

money back, give it to them honestly and up front. Say you want to reward

responsible people on medium incomes and be done with it.



The problem with dressing up a tax cut for the middle classes as "marriage tax

breaks" is that it excludes some very worthy groups of people, namely wives

deserted by their husbands, husbands deserted by their wives and the children of

those sad, broken unions. It also further stigmatises that fast-growing

demographic - the single person who fails, through no fault of their own, to

find a mate. To judge if a taxpayer deserves some slack according to whether or

not they have persuaded a partner to walk down the aisle seems very arbitrary

when fewer people than ever make a go of wedlock.



Ah but, the marriage tax proponents say, if only marriage carried tax incentives

it would be more popular and last longer. Would these enthusiasts please point

me to one example of a separated couple they can honestly say would rediscover

their love of each other if they were given £150 a year. Bickering, angry,

resentful lovers do not stay together for the sake of an extra £12.50 a week

(the sum mooted when the idea was in the Tory manifesto).



More pertinently, perhaps, this policy has no effect on the problem families we

really need to help lower down the socio-economic scale. Take the young couple I

saw in my local park in south London the other day, screaming at each other in

front of their frightened toddler: she accusing him of beating her up, he barely

able to walk or speak, presumably because of the influence of drink or drugs.

These are the couples we need to make stable, but the reality of their lives

will not be altered by telling them they can share a tax-free allowance. Married

couples are a self-selecting social group.



As I say, I don't mind rewarding the middle classes per se. But there is one

more reason why the Conservative party should be cautious. The spectre of "back

to basics". You pose an interesting moral question as a politician if you reward

marriage through the tax and benefits system. You inevitably draw attention to

your own union. You put the spotlight on the marriages of those in the cabinet

and, indeed, of all MPs who vote through such legislation. Suddenly, rumours of

a "high-profile affair in Downing Street" might become all the more intriguing.

Whispers about a senior cabinet minister who has had a fling and put his wife

through hell become more than gossip. They become an important part of a policy

debate.



Is marriage a state-sponsored benefit, a matter for public policy, or a

well-intentioned but fraught personal arrangement that a growing number of

couples are finding hard to abide by?



To wit: do you take this marriage tax break as your lawfully wedded policy, to

have and to hold through scurrilous tabloid revelations? It is a brave

politician who says "I do".



Melissa Kite is contributing editor of the Spectator



