





David Cameron's clamour to open the EU treaties to get a new deal for Britain in

Europe could trigger a whole stream of risky national votes, senior EU officials

said yesterday amid exasperation with the prime minister's concession to Tory

backbenchers on the referendum bill.



European leaders declined to say anything publicly about the Conservative

party's draft bill on an in-out EU referendum. It is being interpreted in

Brussels as internal Tory party politicking, but privately there is acute and

increasing frustration with Cameron's tactics.



They complained that while in Washington Cameron launched another round of

Brussels-bashing when he was supposed to be promoting the merits of a potential

gamechanging trade pact between the EU and the US.



"It's the frustration, even on things like this when it would be better to talk

up the EU. You would actually have thought this was just a US-UK trade pact,"

said one official.



"It's the kind of stuff where you just feel you're banging your head off the

wall."



Another senior official said: "It's pure political posturing. Pure ideology.

British pragmatism has gone away."



Officials also pointed to the irony of George Osborne being in Brussels on

Tuesday to push strongly for an EU deal to curb tax evasion even while the talk

in his party ranks was about quitting the EU.



The jury is out on whether Cameron will win his fight to get a fiendishly

complicated renegotiation of the Lisbon treaty, with the aim of securing new

British terms of EU membership that would then be put to a referendum in 2017 if

Cameron wins a second term in 2015.



The big political changes being made in the eurozone as a result of the currency

crisis would warrant a renegotiation, Brussels concedes. But there are major

political obstacles in the member states militating against reopening the

treaty.



Even before a vote on a new settlement in Britain, a revised Lisbon treaty would

certainly trigger referendum calls in Ireland or Denmark.



"Then you have the domino effect. What about the Netherlands, Sweden, France.

(President Francois) Hollande's position is key. He needs a referendum like a

hole in the head," said one of the officials.



Opinion polls show a pattern of collapsing support for the EU in France while

Hollande's ratings are at historical lows for a French president. Hollande was

traumatised by France's rejection of an EU constitution in 2005 and would seek

to avoid any such repetition.



"There will be huge pressure for referendums," said one of the senior sources.

"But politicians are unlikely to start on the road to referendums if they think

they will lose them."



There is also exasperation in EU capitals that Cameron has declined, as yet, to

flesh out what kind of changes he wants or which policy areas he hopes to

renegotiate.



The puzzlement extends to British officials and business. A delegation from the

Confederation of British Industry was in Brussels and sounded out the European

commission about what Downing Street wanted because they have not been told.



Similar puzzlement surrounds the battery of EU police, justice, and security

measures that Britain needs to renegotiate, a policy recently severely

criticised by a House of Lords inquiry as damaging the British national

interest.



Captions:



Officials noted the irony of George Osborne's Brussels visit to push for an EU

tax deal while his party is split on EU membership



