





MPs voted unanimously - by 304 votes- in favour of a parliamentary bill that

would pave the way for a referendum on Britain's EU membership by 2017 after the

vast majority of Labour and Liberal Democrat MPs boycotted the debate.



William Hague, the foreign secretary, accused Labour of lacking courage after Ed

Miliband did not take part and advised his MPs to abstain in the vote.



The Labour and Lib Dem decision meant that the private member's bill, promoted

by the Tory backbencher James Wharton, won the rare distinction of winning a

second reading with unanimous support. The vote was triggered after Peter Luff

and Geoffrey Clifton-Brown, two Tory MPs who support the bill, agreed to act as

tellers for the no votes.



The number of votes in favour exactly matches the number of Conservative MPs who

faced a three-line whip to support the bill. But not every Tory voted in favour.

The numbers were boosted by a handful of Labour supporters.



Hague was scathing about the Labour leadership. He told the BBC: "They didn't

have the courage to vote for or against it and that suggests that at later

stages, they will try to block this in various ways."



The shadow foreign secretary, Douglas Alexander, dismissed David Cameron's

"arbitrary" plan to hold a vote in 2017 but declined to rule out a referendum,

saying Labour would be governed by the national interest.



Hague said of Labour: "With some in favour, some against, some adamantly for not

having one, some adamantly for deciding later at some point, perhaps before the

general election but who knows - with such a shambles of confusion and weak

leadership, no wonder (Labour MPs) are wondering what they are here for and

where their leader is now. One day Unite (the trade union) will give them the

orders of how to vote."



David Cameron fully supports the Wharton bill, which, in the absence of Liberal

Democrat support for a government measure, is the only way in which the Tories

can vote in favour of the prime minister's 2017 referendum pledge.



The Labour leadership is embarking on an intense debate on whether to embarrass

Downing Street by tabling an amendment to call for a referendum before the 2015

general election. Some senior figures warn this would be irresponsible because

it would jeopardise Britain's EU membership.



Alexander, who mocked the prime minister for changing his position after saying

in 2006 that the Conservative party should stop "banging on" about Europe, said:

"(This) bill reflects an arbitrary date unrelated to the likely timetable of

major treaty change. It . . . is brought forward by a party divided between

those seeking consent and those seeking exit."



A series of Labour MPs, including the former ministers Frank Field and Keith

Vaz, said they would vote in favour of the referendum bill.



Kenneth Clarke, the pro-European former chancellor, was the only Tory cabinet

minister who did not vote in favour of the bill. A spokeswoman for Clarke said:

"Mr Clarke has been on a short leave of absence for family health reasons."



Captions:



William Hague and David Cameron during the referendum debate



