





Clegg: Appearing on the radio is an important way to get my message across.



First-time caller: What's your position on the onesie?



Clegg: I'm very glad you asked that. The Conservatives are very much against the

onesie, but we in the Lib Dems believe we are much better off in a onesie.



Miliband: One nation, one nation . . .



Clegg: One onesie, one onesie . . .



Cameron: Can someone tell me what's going on?



Osborne: Sorry Cams, old boy. There's no one from the civil service in Downing

Street at the moment, so I don't have a clue either. You could look in the

diary.



Cameron: I've done that, but it wasn't much help. Just something about making a

very important speech about Europe on Monday.



Civil service: Actually, we've decided it's going to be on Friday instead.



Cameron: I knew that really. Can we rehearse what it is exactly I believe in?



Civil service: This may take a while . . .



Cameron: I believe . . . No, make that I firmly believe, that the European Union

is both vital and entirely irrelevant to Britain's interests. So it is

absolutely right that we should use this opportunity to place ourselves at the

centre of Europe by trying to distance ourselves as far from it as possible . .

.



Osborne: Total masterpiece . . .



Cameron: And, in conclusion, it is right that the people of Britain should be

allowed to have a referendum sometime long after the next election, by when I

will be out of a job so I'm not too bothered one way or the other . . .



Clegg: Will I be out of a job, too, Daddy?



Cameron: That depends on whether you think you've got one now . . .



Osborne: Just look at these latest figures! The economy is booming.



Civil service: I think you'll find you're holding them the wrong way up.



Osborne: Oh! So I am! I did wonder why there were so many shops being boarded up

on the high street.



Tesco: Let them eat horse!



Theresa May: After extensive analysis of the CCTV footage from outside Downing

Street, I now recommend that police officers' starting salaries should be cut by

£4K.



Thrasher Mitchell: I love you, Theresa.



