





The prime minister was in the US, showing - in Harriet Harman's words - his

leadership qualities by abstaining in the great Euro debate. Remember how

Margaret Thatcher came to believe that abroad was more important than at home?

Didn't do her much good. (Cameron will now miss two more prime minister's

questions, owing to another lavish holiday that starts next week.)



Back at home, the parties were lining up, or rather milling about. We are

supposed to have a confrontational chamber; many Europeans have a semi-circle

designed for all shades of opinion.



Now at Westminster we have a mosh pit, with headbangers dancing, whirling at

random and bashing each other with their elbows. The Tory party is like a rugby

union match in which all 30 players are wearing the same strip. They're not sure

who they are grabbing round the knees, but they're having a lot of fun doing it.



I have tried to work out a handy guide for readers. The Conservative party is in

three groups: firstly, the ones who want us out of Europe tomorrow. Some very

strange people there. If the late Charles Addams designed a political sect, it

would look like this lot, with Peter Bone as the sinister butler.



For example, John Baron, a leader of the moshers, declared yesterday that "we as

a party are more united than ever before on this issue".



Then there are the ones who are vaguely anti-Europe but will make up their minds

when David Cameron gets the changes he demands. These may include abolition of

the Common Agricultural Policy (yeah, right) or possibly the EU postponing its

requirement for straight cucumbers.



And then there are the pro-Europeans, spiritual leader Ken Clarke. David Cameron

might be in either of the two latter groups, but we don't know because he isn't

here to tell us.



Labour. On the whole pro-Europe. Their position is clear: they are in favour of

an in-out referendum, perhaps, and not now, because we don't know what reforms

might come along, but not later either because it would lead to "uncertainty".

In other words, they might be in favour, and they might not. Let's face it; it's

none of our business.



Ukip. They don't have any MPs, but are now the third party in most polls. Their

leader is charismatic piss-artist Nigel Farage, who wants an inn-out referendum.

Or any kind of pub. Rarely has anyone with so little power wielded so much

influence.



The Lib Dems. Now regarded as an annoying irrelevance, as demonstrated when

their leader Nick Clegg had to take prime minister's questions yesterday. He

could barely make himself heard against a barrage of booing and jeering from the

Labour benches, and sneering from the Tories sitting behind him.



He used to want an in-out referendum, until he joined in coalition with Cameron,

who does want an in-out referendum, so he changed his mind. Tory mosher Edward

Leigh mentioned the Lib-Dem manifesto calling for said in-out referendum with

the Cleggster on the cover. "Was he an imposter, or just a hypocrite?"



I hope I have cleared that all up. I am off to lie down in a dark room.



