





In devotedly pro-European Germany, it is a radical message. In a packed beer

hall meeting on the outskirts of Stuttgart, Roland Klaus tells scores of

middle-aged, middle-class Germans what they want to hear. In short - no more

bailouts.



"We've got the possibility to stop this madness," the former financial TV

journalist intones. "Germany pays for no more rescue packages."



In an election in which the major parties essentially support Chancellor Angela

Merkel's approach to the euro crisis, and two-thirds of Germans back her euro

rescue plans, it is a surprise to find that thousands of Germans want to leave

the single currency.



The conventional argument is that Germany has come out of the euro crisis better

than its partners, and that Merkel has protected German national interests by

foisting austerity on the European south.



But not everyone sees it that way. And a new party, the Alternative fur

Deutschland (AfD), is seeking to tap into that resentment to get seats in

parliament in next Sunday's election.



The alternative to further bailouts, says the party, would be to refuse aid to

faltering economies, encouraging them to leave the eurozone under their own

steam. This would pave the way for a two-speed Europe with parallel currencies -

one for the struggling south and one for the productive north.



The plan appeals to voters like those in Baden-Wurttemberg, home to the

country's automobile industry and global headquarters of luxury carmakers

Daimler and Porsche. Many here say the euro was always doomed because of the

cultural gulf between the "lazy" south and the "industrious" north.



And if a smaller, streamlined eurozone failed to materialise, the party has

dared to suggest Germany would be better off out of it. "We'd say it clear. It

can't be a taboo any more that it's an option for Germany to return to the

Deutschmark," the AfD's Klaus tells his supporters to rapturous applause.



The AfD was formed in April by an economics professor, Bernd Lucke, who has

described the euro as a "great mistake and failure". It has remained a fringe

party - openly anti-euro sentiments have remained off-limits for all mainstream

parties. And despite everything, 66% of Germans support Merkel's policy of

rescuing the euro.



But this idealistic commitment to Europe, says the AfD, is blinding the country

to the long-term costs of repeatedly bailing out the eurozone. "We aren't left

or right," Klaus says. "We're citizens who are worried about the future of our

country."



For all Germany's pro-European rhetoric, there are signs these fears are not

uncommon. A poll in April suggested just under a third of Germans would in

principle vote for an anti-euro party - yet it is still unclear whether this

will translate into the minimum 5% of votes needed for the eurosceptics to enter

parliament in next weekend's election.



"The issue of Europe, let alone the common European currency, has never played a

role in a German election," says Peter Matuschek, political analyst at German

public opinion researchers Forsa. "As a purely anti-euro party, the AfD would

have no chance of getting enough votes to enter parliament."



Wary of being pigeonholed as a single-issue party, the AfD has promoted its

wider, populist policies. Calls for a tougher stance on unskilled immigrants and

stricter rules on benefits to stem economic migrants appeal to the rightwing

populist vote, as does the promotion of Swiss-style direct democracy based on

referendums.



In response, leftwing groups have accused the AfD of providing a political home

for neo-Nazis and racists, something vehemently denied by the leadership. Yet

over the summer regional chapters said they had seen attempts by Germany's

far-right fringe to infiltrate the party. Desperate to shake off this damaging

association, the AfD has distanced itself from other anti-EU parties across

Europe, emphasising it is not calling for Germany to exit the EU.



The party's fortunes were given a boost last month when the German finance

minister, Wolfgang Schauble, indicated that Greece would probably need yet

another bailout. Since then party officials say their support has swelled and

they are now expecting to hit at least 7% or 8% of the vote, despite struggling

to top 3% in the polls.



Analysts say the AfD's chances on 22 September will be at the mercy of

unpredictable protest voters. "At every election . . . there are protest voters

who, without ideological conviction, vote for any party they feel will most

clearly demonstrate their dissatisfaction with the status quo," says Klaus-Peter

Schoppner, head of opinion pollster Emnid.



If the AfD gets enough votes to enter the Bundestag it could deny a majority to

either the current coalition government or the opposition - potentially forcing

Merkel into a pact with rivals the Social Democratic party (SPD). Neither party

wants this, but polls suggest this would be a majority of voters' preferred

outcome.



Captions:



Roland Klaus has called for an end to eurozone bailouts



