





Two speeches yesterday, one by a man who has been this country's prime minister,

the other by a man who wants to be our next one, mark what may be a watershed

moment in the party politics of this parliament. Sir John Major's speech at

Chatham House supporting David Cameron's EU referendum proposal was a decent

speech by a decent man. But it could not escape being a reminder of what was,

and still is, wrong with the Conservative party. Significant though the issue

unquestionably is, Europe is neither the most important question facing Britain

today nor the one that tops most people's list of concerns. But it is the number

one obsession of large parts of the Tory party, and that obsession warps

everything else. Sir John is right that a vote to stay in the EU would be good

for Britain, but he of all people ought to know that a Tory party consumed by

the European issue is not good for this country - and will deserve to be

punished for it.



Ever since Mr Cameron focused his attention on this predominantly internal party

issue last month, the Tory party's poll ratings have suffered. The Guardian's

ICM poll this week, showing the Tories down at 29% and a strong Labour lead of

12 points, was striking evidence of the penalty the Conservative party is

paying. ICM's findings have subsequently been confirmed by other polls this week

where the figures are in similar territory. The Tories' wilful misreading of the

public mood is inescapably an opportunity for Labour to cement its appeal. But

it is also a challenge to the opposition too. To win an election and govern

effectively, Labour will have to win the voters' confidence, not simply offer

itself as the vessel through which voters express their irritation with Tory

failings. The purpose of Ed Miliband's speech in Bedford yesterday was to begin

the task of winning that confidence.



Mr Miliband's overarching aims were to establish the declining living standards

of ordinary people as the central battleground of the 2015 election and to

address Labour's trailing poll ratings on economic management. His narrative of

modern Britain, as he explained to our political editor this week, is that the

disproportionately growing wealth of those at the top is not just squeezing the

living standards of those on the middle and bottom rungs of the ladder, but is

also smothering the chances of growth. The message yesterday was that rewards

and incentives for the many can be both the engine of new growth and also a more

generous form of wealth distribution. It is a powerful message, giving a bit of

substance to the rather nebulous One Nation slogan, and potentially well suited

to hard economic times. And while Mr Miliband's specific pledges of a (welcome)

mansion tax on property worth over £2m and the (questionable) restoration of a

10p in the pound tax bracket do not seal the deal, they are clear markers of the

direction that a Labour government could take. Promises of cheaper train tickets

and energy bills are easier to make than deliver, but this is plainly fertile

terrain.



There was tactical cunning in Mr Miliband's speech as well as a big picture.

Embracing the 10p tax pledge - which has its supporters on the Tory benches -

cramps George Osborne's style in his budget planning. Taking up the mansion tax

gives Labour something substantive to talk about to the Liberal Democrats if a

differently configured hung parliament emerges in 2015. Openly criticising

Gordon Brown goes some way towards answering taunts that Labour's Eds are part

of the problem not the solution. It would be naive to pretend that this speech

is a game-changer.



Labour has an economic credibility deficit that will not be overcome by a single

speech. Mr Miliband has not won the argument yet and still seems reluctant to

talk about Britain's economic problems in the wider global context with which Mr

Cameron, for all the false conclusions he draws, seems more comfortable. But Mr

Miliband has begun to write something specific on what for too long has been

Labour's fiscal blank page. For that alone, he deserves credit for a good day's

work.



