





The Conservative candidate in the Eastleigh byelection endured a tricky first

campaign outing when she faced awkward questions on comments attributed to her

about subjects including immigration, Europe, gay marriage and fox-hunting.



Maria Hutchings demonstrated that she is likely to receive plenty of coverage

during the campaign by saying that she would support Britain leaving the EU if

there was a referendum now and would have voted against gay marriage.



Hutchings also appeared to attempt to distance herself from the Tory leadership

by emphasising she was not a "rich toff" and vowed to fight housing developments

in the countryside, which could put her at odds with the coalition's planning

reforms. The Conservatives were the first party to unveil a candidate for the

byelection prompted by the fall of Liberal Democrat Chris Huhne. The Tory party

chairman, Grant Shapps, came to the Hampshire town to launch Hutchings's

campaign.



The first curveball was pitched within moments when Hutchings was asked how she

would have voted on gay marriage. "I would have not voted for same-sex

marriage," she replied. Candidate and chairman walked along Market Street and

visited Smedley's butcher shop before adjourning to the Poppins cafe, where she

did a round of interviews.



Hutchings, 51, explained how she had lived in this former railway town since

being selected to run against Huhne at the last election. She said she was a

hard-working mother-of-four who "lived and breathed the constituency". She was

determined to run a clean campaign and would not be drawn to comment on Huhne's

conviction. "That issue is in the past," she said.



Hutchings, who describes herself as a worker in the communications industry,

admitted she once had to borrow £1.80 to pay for parking from members of a job

club she ran in Eastleigh because a cash machine would not give her any money.



But the first really awkward moment came when she was asked about interviews she

gave to the Daily Mail eight years ago. Hutchings, who has a son with autism,

hit the headlines - and attracted the attention of Tory strategists - during the

2005 general election after confronting Tony Blair about education for children

with special needs.



In one subsequent interview she is quoted as saying: "I don't care about

refugees." In another she allegedly said: "It is the minority groups that have

benefited from Labour's time in office - the immigrants, the gays, the bloody

foxes."



Of the first interview, Hutchings explained: "What I said to the Daily Mail

journalist was there is a limited pot of money, my son is very vulnerable, I'm

told he needs these services and yet that pot of money has got to stretch. That

Daily Mail journalist said to me: 'So what do you think abut immigration and

asylum seekers?' What I said was: 'I don't care about talking about asylum

seekers because I'm here to talk about my son.'"



Of the second interview she said simply: "I've never said anything about gays or

bloody foxes. . . and I don't know where that's come from." Pressed on

immigration, she said: "My thoughts about immigration are very much like the

people of this country. People are out for fairness, it's got nothing to do with

race."



She pointed out that her mother, Vicky, is from Malta and continued: "We have a

very good record of caring about people coming to this country. But we are going

though very difficult times and people want to be sure that they are getting the

most they can get for their families."



Asked if immigration should be limited she replied: "Yes, which is what we are

doing." She declined to say what the limit should be, arguing: "That is well

above my pay grade."



She spoke about the need to protect the countryside against development. On her

website she says: "Everyone wants to see new family homes, but bulldozing over

our green spaces is not way to do it."



Inevitably, the issue of Europe was brought up. Initially Hutchings managed to

bat the questions away. But as she was being ushered away by her minders, she

was asked how she would vote in a referendum and replied: "If there was a

referendum now, I would vote out."



Captions:



Maria Hutchings: questioned over Daily Mail interviews during 2005 election



