





David Cameron yesterday called for an overhaul of one of the fundamental

freedoms of the European Union, the ability of all EU citizens to move freely in

the union.



The prime minister told a summit of EU leaders in Brussels that the criteria

used when negotiating the entry of new member states had to be changed to curb

"mass population movements".



He also hinted that Britain could veto the admission of new member states unless

the rules were changed, although there is no prospect of any further countries

joining the EU over the next decade.



According to witnesses at the summit, there were no responses from other leaders

to Cameron's call for a new regime on freedom of movement, one of the four basic

freedoms of the EU, along with capital, services, and goods.



"We must return the principle of free movement to what is reasonable," the prime

minister said. "There is a need to tackle free movement abuse."



His remarks went beyond measures to restrict the rights of EU newcomers to

Britain to claim benefits, moves announced in advance of opening Britain to

Bulgaria and Romania from 1 January.



"As we contemplate countries like Serbia or Albania one day joining the EU we

must find a way to slow down access to each other's labour markets until we can

be sure that it will not cause vast migrations. We need to return the principle

of free movement to a more sensible basis and make it clear that it cannot be a

completely unqualified right."



In the cases of Bulgaria and Romania, Cameron said: "There is freedom of

movement to come and get a job. There is not free movement to come and claim."



But he went further than the immediate issue of the two Balkan countries,

arguing that in future curbs should be introduced when membership is being

negotiated.



He told the other leaders, according to sources, that a candidate country's

wealth should determine whether its citizens would enjoy the right to move

across the EU when it joined. Wage levels and a country's gross domestic product

were especially important benchmarks, he said.



"It's a big reversal of Britain's (EU) enlargement policy," said an EU official.

"The UK has always been the champion of enlargement. That's changed. ."



There was no sign of support for the British position at the summit, according

to sources. The European commission says the fundamentals of freedom of movement

cannot be tampered with.



Despite the move by the home secretary, Theresa May, to prevent newcomers to

Britain from claiming benefits for three months after their arrival, Cameron

admitted that the government had inadequate data on the issue.



The clampdown, which was rushed through, demonstrated the anxiety in Downing

Street at the possible reaction of Tory voters - and restive backbenchers - to

Romanians and Bulgarians travelling to Britain en masse.



Hinting at the possible blocking of further states joining, Cameron pointedly

noted that admitting a new country to the EU required the unanimous backing of

all 28 countries. Sources said Cameron wanted to use the issue as another lever

to try to force a renegotiation of EU treaties to try to secure a new deal for

Britain in Europe before possibly putting the UK's membership to the vote in a

2017 referendum.



He repeated his calls for treaty change, despite the lack of enthusiasm almost

everywhere else in the EU. Cameron noted Germany's push at the summit for a new

system of binding contracts among eurozone countries forcing economic reforms, a

proposal that received minimal support and was shelved until towards the end of

next year.



Cameron described such potential changes as "far-reaching". He said: "This will

obviously mean much deeper integration (in the eurozone). This will require

treaty change."



He added: "We need to go one step further and look at more robust transitional

controls in the future." He said he agreed with the Dutch that Albania should

not be allowed to open membership negotiations yet.



