





The president of the European Commission has sparked a row with the

Conservatives by accusing them of copying Ukip and suggesting Nigel Farage's

party will become Britain's "first force" in Brussels.



His remarks provoked outrage among Tories, who said last night they "disagree

strongly with the president of the commission". Downing Street also slapped down

Barroso's suggestion that anti-Europe feeling could take the continent back to

"divisions, the war, the trenches".



Barroso made the remarks to the Conservative leader in Brussels, Martin

Callanan, telling him: "Your party is looking like Ukip. I have some doubts

whether you are going to be elected in Britain or if it is not Ukip that will be

the first force in British elections. Because when it comes to being against

Europe, people prefer the original to the copy. That is probably why they are

going to vote for Mr Farage."



A source close to the prime minister said: "The President of the European

Commission should respect the views of the governing party elected by the people

of Britain.



"Of course it would be more convenient to the Brussels elite to have other

parties they think they can ignore. However, the prime minister will continue to

stand up for the British people, fighting to ensure they get the best deal in

Europe and have a say on it in a referendum by 2017."



A Conservative spokesman said support for Britain's EU membership was wafer-thin

and that the EU needs fundamental change. "Ukip are all talk when it comes to

the EU. Only Conservatives will deliver change and a referendum," he said.



Barroso's remarks will be a boost for Ukip ahead of next year's elections, but

last night the party was embroiled in a controversy over the suspension of Chris

Pain, a senior figure who has been tipped to become the party's first ever MP.



Pain became Ukip group leader on Lincolnshire county council in May, after the

party took 16 seats in the local elections. The sweeping electoral success of

Ukip in Lincolnshire made the Tory seat of Boston & Skegness one of the party's

best hopes of getting an MP at the next election.



However, Pain is now facing disciplinary proceedings under the party's

"emergency powers". Shortly after his election, comments were posted on a

Facebook page purportedly belonging to Pain referring to illegal immigrants as

"sandal-wearing, bomb-making, camel-riding, goat-******* ragheads". Pain has

denied making the comments, saying one of his accounts could have been hacked or

cloned.



Ukip has declined to reveal why Pain has been suspended, saying it would be

"wrong and unfair" before a committee has heard the evidence against Pain.



However, Pain said the suspension is to do with a "big issue" between him and

Steve Crowther, the party's chairman, and not the Facebook incident.



Captions:



Jose Manuel Barroso told the leader of Tories in Brussels that Eurosceptic

voters will 'prefer the original to the copy'



