





David Cameron's strategy of renegotiating Britain's relationship with the EU is

supported by most voters, with the prime minister seen as the best UK political

leader to conduct the talks, according to a poll conducted for the Open Europe

thinktank.



The poll also shows that only 61% of Ukip voters want Britain to leave the EU.

The responses, compiled by polling company ComRes, suggest Ukip will come top in

next May's European parliamentary elections, but that Cameron is still seen as

the most trusted figure to negotiate a new deal with the EU.



Less than a third (29%) say Cameron would be most likely to succeed in

negotiating a better deal for Britain in Europe, followed by Labour's Ed

Miliband (14%), Ukip's Nigel Farage (12%) and the Liberal Democrats' Nick Clegg

(4%). Among party leaders' voters, Cameron enjoys by far the greatest confidence

(80%), while only 25% of Lib Dem voters think Clegg is the most likely to

succeed. However, 20% of the British public say that none of the party leaders

listed would be likely to succeed in negotiating a better deal for Britain.



If a referendum on Britain's membership of the EU were held now, the poll

suggests 37% of the electorate would vote to remain in, compared with 41% who

would back an exit. But if there were a significant return of powers to

Westminster followed by a referendum, 47% would vote to stay, while 32% would

vote to leave.



The most favoured option, with 38% support, is a renegotiation to remain an EU

member but outside the eurozone. By contrast one in four (26%) say Britain

should withdraw from the EU completely. Almost two-fifths (18%) would like to

maintain the current relationship, while 6% would prefer closer integration,

with Britain adopting the single currency.



More than half (55%) of the British public believe the priority in any

renegotiation should be an independent UK immigration policy. Other areas of

priority include giving Westminster more powers to block unwanted EU laws (42%),

reducing Britain's contribution to the EU budget (36%) and allowing the UK to

have sole control over criminal justice laws (32%).



Among those British adults certain to vote in the European elections Ukip would

come first (27%) and Labour second (23%). The Conservatives would come third

with 21%. Almost two-fifths (39%) of those who voted Tory in the 2009 European

elections would back Ukip if the poll were held tomorrow - suggesting Cameron

may be doing the right thing in seeking to underline how he would renegotiate

Britain's relationship.



Open Europe's director, Mats Persson, said: "Whilst the Conservatives may be

heading for a perfect storm in the EU elections, their overarching goal of a

renegotiated position for the UK in the EU still enjoys substantial support from

across the political spectrum.



ComRes interviewed 2,003 adults online between 22 and 24 May.



Captions:



80% of Tory voters polled believe David Cameron is most likely to secure the

best deal for Britain from the EU



