





David Cameron launched an 11th-hour bid to fend off the threat from Ukip when he

indicated that he was prepared to give serious consideration to a Tory backbench

campaign to place an EU referendum on the statute book before the next election.



As the Tories braced themselves for losses of at least 500 seats in the English

local elections today - with a strong showing by Ukip - the prime minister said

yesterday he was prepared to "strengthen" his offer of an in/out referendum by

2017.



Cameron also reached out to the right by saying that he was prepared to listen

to calls from the military disclosed in the Guardian and allow funds from

Britain's aid budget to be diverted to peacekeeping defence operations.



The prime minister issued the signals to the right as the Tories struggled to

maintain a consistent line on the threat posed by Ukip. William Hague echoed

remarks over the weekend by Kenneth Clarke who dismissed the party as a

"collection of clowns", when he said the party had a "clown-like aspect". The

prime minister, by contrast, declined to criticise Ukip and would not even use

its name in a BBC interview.



Nigel Farage, the Ukip leader, joked that the Tory insults had helped his party.

Farage told ITV News: "Keep the abuse coming, boys, keep it coming. Ken Clarke

had a go at the weekend and we went up by 2% in the opinion polls afterwards. So

please keep abusing us, because when you abuse us what you are doing is you are

abusing the vast majority of the British public who want us to be a free

independent country that controls its own borders."



The prime minister used his final interview ahead of the local elections to

reach out to voters tempted by Ukip when he indicated that he may be prepared to

throw the weight of the 304 Tory MPs behind placing a referendum on the statute

book before the next election.



The prime minister is facing strong pressure from the Tory right to face down

the Liberal Democrats, who would oppose any legislation for a referendum in this

parliament. John Baron, the MP for Basildon and Billericay, has won the support

of 100 Tory MPs for a letter calling on the prime minister to bring forward

enabling legislation for a referendum.



Cameron told The World at One on Radio 4: "I think we need to demonstrate

absolutely that we are serious about this referendum. We have said we are going

to hold it. It is going to be an in/out referendum. We have set a date by which

it must be held. Anything we can do to strengthen that offer I am prepared to

consider."



Downing Street sources acknowledged that the prime minister would not be able to

introduce any government legislation in the face of Lib Dem opposition. But they

indicated that Cameron may be prepared to support moves by backbenchers.



Baron, who warned the prime minister earlier this week that Ukip voters had

"genuine concerns" about the EU, gave a guarded welcome to the prime minister's

remarks. The MP, who is annoyed that Downing Street has failed to arrange a

meeting for him with the prime minister, said the Tory leadership would have to

agree to support a bill and not offer support for a non-binding vote.



Baron says the new session of parliament, which opens on 8 May, offers the

chance when a ballot for private members' bill will be held. If an MP who comes

near the top of the ballot supported a referendum bill it would have a strong

chance if the Tory leadership lent its support.



Baron said: "Our commitment to a referendum must be both credible and

believable. It's credible because we have the out option now. But it is not yet

believable because there is a deep public mistrust out there when people hear

politicians making promises about EU referenda. They have heard too many before

and too many have been broken.



"What would make it more believable is a serious attempt to get legislation

through in this parliament. Whether successful or not it really would show good

intent and would be more believable than a general election manifesto promise.

It would be in law."



The prime minister also reiterated his remarks during his trip to India in

February that aid spending could be diverted to peacekeeping. He told the BBC:

"There are rules for what you can use the aid budget for and it is right we obey

those rules. But I also think it is right we ask the question about what does

development actually consist of."



The Tories are defending nearly two-thirds (1,477) of the 2,362 seats up for

grabs. They expect heavy losses as they defend seats captured when they were at

a polling high in 2009, and are nervous they will be squeezed by the anti-EU

Ukip.



Captions:



500



The number of lost seats the Tories are bracing themselves for, having been at a

high when the same seats were last contested



