





David Cameron last night scrapped plans to deliver a long-awaited speech on

Britain's future in the EU after abandoning a trip to the Netherlands as the

Algerian hostage crisis worsened.



Downing Street indicated that the prime minister would deliver his speech, in

which he planned to warn that Britain could "drift towards the exit" unless

powers are handed back from the EU, once the hostage crisis had ended. The

postponement was announced shortly before the prime minister was due to fly to

meet the Dutch prime minister, Mark Rutte, before his speech in Amsterdam.



Some Tories were surprised that No 10 took so long to abandon the trip. Downing

Street had acknowledged the gravity of the crisis in Algeria yesterday morning

by announcing that arrangements were being made for the prime minister to chair

a meeting of the emergency Cobra committee from The Hague today.



Ed Miliband, who was privately suggesting that the prime minister appeared to be

putting the interests of Eurosceptics above his duties to deal with a security

crisis, had earlier said that the prime minister had spent six years preparing a

speech that will cause five years of uncertainty.



Cameron had been due to warn his fellow European leaders that British membership

of the EU could be put at risk unless its terms were changed. "If we don't

address these challenges, the danger is that Europe will fail and the British

people will drift towards the exit," Cameron was due to say in the speech to an

audience of business leaders in Amsterdam.



"There is a growing frustration that the EU is seen as something that is done to

people rather than acting on their behalf. And this is being intensified by the

very solutions required to resolve the economic problems.



"People are increasingly frustrated that decisions taken further and further

away from them mean their living standards are slashed through enforced

austerity or their taxes are used to bail out governments on the other side of

the continent."



The prime minister had planned to brief the leaders of France and Italy last

night on his speech, after earlier discussing what he was planning to say with

Barack Obama after the White House had made clear last week it wanted "a strong

British voice" in Europe. Last night the White House made clear that the US

president maintained the pressure on Cameron in the call.



Cameron was due to declare that he will demand the repatriation of some powers

if he wins an overall majority at the next election. The new terms of British

membership would then be put to the people in a referendum, possibly around

2018.



"More of the same will not secure a long-term future for the eurozone. More of

the same will not see the EU keeping pace with the new powerhouse economies.

More of the same will not bring the EU any closer to its citizens. More of the

same will just produce more of the same - less competitiveness, less growth,

fewer jobs," Cameron was due to say.



But he was given a taste of business leaders' unease when Sir Andrew Cahn, until

recently head of the government's main overseas trade body, UK Trade and

Investment, said: "The chill factor is there, the nagging worry that the UK is

retreating into inconsequential isolation."



Lord Browne, the former BP boss, said: "Uncertainty is the enemy of investment,

and we should be wary of doing anything which tarnishes Britain's reputation as

a home of choice for human and financial capital."



The prime minister was due to say that he supports British membership of the EU

and that his aim is to stabilise support in Britain by addressing concerns about

power amassed in Brussels. He wants to use a major revision of the Lisbon

treaty, which may take place after the European parliamentary elections in 2014,

to table his demand for the repatriation of social and employment legislation.



He planned to identify the three major challenges facing Europe as the eurozone

crisis, weak competitiveness, and a lack of democratic accountability. Failure

to address these would increase support among those who want to leave, though he

was due to say that is not his preference. "I want the European Union to be a

success and I want a relationship between Britain and the EU that keeps us in

it."



Unease over his speech was illustrated in a warning from the president of the

European parliament. Martin Schulz, a German SPD MEP, wrote on the Huffington

Post website that Cameron wanted to set a "dangerous precedent", which might

lead to the "breakup of the EU".



But the prime minister last night won support from Boris Johnson. In remarks

briefed before the speech was cancelled, the London mayor said Cameron should

tell the EU: "We will allow you to use our common EU institutions - which we

help fund - to pursue your project, if you help us with a renegotiation. We

therefore want to complete the single market - which everyone supports - and we

want to get rid of some of the barnacles that have become attached to the hull."



Polly Toynbee, page 31 >=



