





British politics is hardening. The post-conference opinion polling reported by

the Guardian yesterday shows a strengthening in Labour and Tory numbers - both

overall, and in terms of determination to vote. To the extent that this is a

national snapshot, the nation is falling out of love with the idea of coalition.



This is cheering for Ed Miliband and his decision to take on the energy

companies - polarising, provocative "socialism" that the country seems to rather

like. But the new dynamic offers Miliband the biggest tactical dilemma of his

life. His answer could define British politics for years ahead - and it's got

nothing to do with the cost of living, one nation or hard-working people. It's

about Europe.



The return to left-right politics, which squeezes the Lib Dems, leaves the

Tories still facing their biggest problem: Ukip. Nigel Farage's party is as much

an angry annexe of the Conservative family as a new phenomenon. Combined with

unreformed constituency boundaries, Ukip voting in 2015 is still likely to rob

Cameron of any chance of an overall majority. If Miliband continues to radiate

an unnatural sense of calm, Ukip is an important part of the cause.



Yet there is one argument that could yet save Cameron's bacon and deliver a

Conservative majority, and it's a simple one, which won't gain full currency

until after next year's European elections: "Vote Ukip, get Labour" (because

splitting the Tory vote would let Labour in). Rightwing voters are desperate for

a European referendum but are bitterly hostile to Miliband; so the Tory message

that if you want a referendum, you must vote Conservative will have a lot of

resonance. So far Labour is talking about a referendum only if there is a major

transfer of powers to Europe. But could that change?



Of all the big tactical plays ahead, this is the big one. You haven't heard much

about it yet, but this is a very hot issue wherever key Labour people get

together in private. The influential backbencher Tom Watson said recently on

television that he might support the Tory rebels' call for an early referendum.

He is not alone.



And of course all of this goes way back in Labour history. The ghosts of Barbara

Castle and Peter Shore, never mind Hugh Gaitskell (and, for much of his life,

Harold Wilson), were never quite exorcised by the New Labour Europhiles. It was,

after all, Labour who gave the country the first European referendum.



Imagine the impact if Ed Miliband turned round now and made the pledge.

Hard-core rightwing voters would be free to vote with their hearts and Nigel

Farage; Cameron would have lost his key line of defence to his right. The Tory

party would be further ripped apart as hardcore Europhobes strove to respond by

trying to bring the referendum forward. Cameron's careful policy of a nuanced

renegotiation followed by a 2017 referendum with all the main parties lined up

in favour of staying in, would collapse. Sensation! If Ed thought he was

garnering some unexpected media support after his move on electricity prices,

this would take him into a whole new league.



Yet this is an Alice in Wonderland story, in which nothing is quite what it

seems. Imagine that Labour commits to a referendum, wins the election, and then

delivers its promise. At this point, of course, Ed Miliband has neither tried

for a renegotiation with Europe nor delivered one. The eurozone is still mired

in low growth and high unemployment. With the British right having just lost,

and seething, I just don't see how a referendum could be won for the

pro-European cause.



So . . . a new Labour prime minister inherits the aftermath of a no vote.

Whatever your views about the EU, the first thing that happens is economic

mayhem. Big companies decamp to Frankfurt or Paris. The pound falls. Many of our

exporters have no idea what's going to happen to them, and the banks aren't keen

to gamble in their favour. This would be an economic storm so big it could

overshadow anything else the new government would be trying to do. Ed would be a

one-term, unsuccessful prime minister.



Miliband will be all too aware of the risks involved. But he's receiving

different advice from people in his party. If Miliband went for a referendum, he

would win a short and spectacular tactical victory but at the price of yet more

bloody battles between the remaining Blairites and the current Labour

leadership.



It isn't worth it. As it happens, and perhaps paradoxically, I'd like to see a

European referendum. I've been arguing about this with friends for weeks - but

what I don't want to see is Labour rushing into a referendum promise, which

would result in us pulling out of Europe shortly after Ed Miliband reaches

Downing Street.



So in the end, all this is about confidence and the will to govern. If Miliband

genuinely thinks that he has the policies, the character and the disciplined

party to win a general election in 2015, then he will not offer an early

referendum. It's only if he really doesn't think he's going to make it without a

radical reshaping of the political landscape that he's going to be tempted. You

want to know what's really going on inside Ed's head? This is the decision you

need to watch for.



jackie.ashley@theguardian.com



