





David Cameron was put on notice last night that no other EU leader is likely to

support his campaign to rewrite the terms of British membership of the union and

then put the outcome to a referendum.



As Britain faces a fresh EU battle over a proposal to cap bankers' bonuses,

Herman Van Rompuy, the president of the European council, attacked the way the

prime minister was waging his campaign for a "new settlement" in Britain's

40-year membership of the EU.



The president said he presumed leaders of other EU countries "neither

particularly like . . . nor particularly fear" Cameron's plans to demand the

repatriation of powers during a future revision of the Lisbon treaty.



"How do you convince a room full of people, when you keep your hand on the door

handle? How to encourage a friend to change, if your eyes are searching for your

coat?" he asked at a Policy Network conference in London.



The intervention by Van Rompuy, who chairs and organises the regular EU summits,

came as Cameron served notice that Britain would challenge an EU agreement to

slash bankers' bonuses at a meeting of European finance ministers next week.



Amid fears that the EU agreement could deal a hammer blow to the City of London,

Cameron said EU regulations needed to be flexible enough to allow international

banks to operate in Britain and the rest of the EU.



At a meeting of Nordic leaders in the Latvian capital, Riga, he said: "We need

to make sure that regulation put in place in Brussels is flexible enough to

allow (international) banks (in London) to continue competing and succeeding

while being located in the UK."



Britain will need to win allies to amend, or reject, the plans hammered out in

Brussels on Wednesday night between officials from the EU's 27 members, MEPs and

the European commission. They are decided by qualified majority voting, which

means no member state has a national veto.



But there were signs that the UK is in danger of alienating one of its closest

allies when the Netherlands questioned Cameron's plan to use a future treaty

change, which may be held to underpin the euro, as a way of repatriating powers.



Frans Timmermans, the Dutch foreign minister, told the Policy Network: "We will

do everything to avoid treaty change if we can fix (the eurozone) within

existing treaties. I believe this is the common opinion in almost all member

states. This is going to be an interesting case for the British government. If

they still want a referendum one would ask: a referendum on what if you don't

have a treaty change?"



In the first setpiece response from a European leader to Cameron's speech, Van

Rompuy endorsed the Dutch view that there is scant appetite for renegotiating

the Lisbon treaty. "Changing the EU treaties is not the priority," he said. "The

work ahead is crucial, but I see no impending need to open the EU treaties for

it. Nor do I feel much appetite for it around the leaders' table."



The president warned that UK government policy on Europe was not just a matter

to be sorted out between London and Brussels. It had to be agreed with 26 other

governments which were already adjusting their policies and decision-taking

because of the Cameron campaign.



In remarks not voiced in public since Cameron made his much-delayed referendum

speech last month, and delivered in London to boot, the former Belgian prime

minister said: "The wish to redefine your country's relationship with the union

has not gone unnoticed. I cannot speak on behalf of the other presidents and

prime ministers, but I presume they neither particularly like it, nor

particularly fear it."



Arguing that Britain had much to gain by remaining a central player in the EU,

and that pooling sovereignty with Germany, France and the other 25 member states

actually magnified UK clout, Van Rompuy called on Cameron to play a more

assertive and positive role in pressing its liberal, free-trade agenda.



Olli Rehn, the influential commissioner for monetary affairs, echoed Van

Rompuy's call for Britain to play a more central role, warning that it "should

not seek to undo our community. This is a game in which, if I were a British

citizen, I would want my country to be playing as a midfield playmaker rather

than watching from the sidelines. No one ever scored goals sitting on the

bench."



Van Rompuy conceded that Cameron would be able to discuss the changes he was

seeking at an EU summit, while appearing to rule out any fundamental revision of

British membership terms.



Senior officials and EU ambassadors in Brussels confirmed this was the

prevailing view among the other governments.



Appearing to deliver a message to Cameron and Britain that had been co-ordinated

with other EU capitals, Van Rompuy said: "The thing is, stepping out of existing

areas of co-operation is not just a matter between 'London' and 'Brussels'. It

would impact on the relationship between your country and 26, soon 27 others. It

is with each of them - friends, neighbours and partners - that you'll have to

make your case."



Van Rompuy warned that Britain was free to exit the EU, but that the exit

"doesn't come for free. It would be legally and politically a most complicated

and unpractical affair. Just think of a divorce after 40 years of marriage."



Captions:



Herman Van Rompuy told the London conference that other EU states did not fear

the UK calls Photograph: Carl Court/AFP



