





Oh happy day. The Italian election result is a triumph for democracy. "No pope,

no government, no police chief," went yesterday's viral tweet, hailing the

arrival in Rome of "punk politics". The outcome is an antidote, not just to

Italy's corrupt politics, but to the dogma of austerity that now has Europe's

economy by the throat. The only way of loosening its grip is through the ballot.

Congratulations, Italy.



The most spectacular victor is Beppe Grillo, a rollicking satirist but with a

clear message: that austerity, the euro and corruption are jointly to blame for

Italy's ills. We can argue the issues, but why bother when no one listens? Just

tell those in charge, as he says, to fuck off. When politicians banned Grillo

from TV, he turned to the blog and the piazza. His knockout blow was the ballot.



Grillo's chief victim is the short-lived prime minister, Mario Monti. He was

pushed into office by the banks a year ago to impose unlimited suffering on the

Italian economy, so as to shore up the euro and thus protect German and other

bank loans from devaluation. Darling of the bankers' ramp, he was Super-Mario.



Like Greece and with no local currency to take the strain, the Italian economy

had to be waterboarded. It shrank by at least 2.2% last year, with official

unemployment at about 10%. Monti promised to hold the Italian economy in its

downward spiral, without growth and ever less able to repay its mounting debt.

Future generations would be in perpetual bondage to German banks.



Grillo spoke for those generations. His one roughly coherent policy may be a

referendum on the euro, but leaving the euro is the key that unlocks the prison

door. Even the revival of the outrageous Silvio Berlusconi is good news: his

irresponsibility might contribute to pushing Italy into financial crisis and

eventual salvation.



For what seems an entire decade, Europe is to be dominated by the "politics of

austerity", a gamble with the economy of an entire continent on a par with that

of the 1920s. Leaders (and their bankers) claim that austerity is a "necessary"

punishment, to be visited on European people for allowing their governments to

borrow beyond their means. The policy offers no growth to pay off the debts, and

for the eurozone no devaluation to reduce their incidence. The message is forget

Keynes and take the medicine, even if it is poison.



Despite being outside the euro straitjacket, Britain's George Osborne holds that

austerity knows no bounds. As he starves the economy of demand and it duly

shrinks, his revenue slides - and the debt and deficit rise. There is a classic

vicious circle. Sooner or later, austerity becomes an end, not a means: an

obsessive self-flagellation. These finance ministers are like Aztec priests at

an altar. If the blood sacrifice fails to deliver rain, there must be more

blood.



You can fool a democracy only so long. The current anti-Keynesian dogma has

lasted four years and is just not working. In Greece and Spain, unemployment is

touching an appalling quarter of the workforce. France is in trouble and, even

in Germany, the strain is telling as growth falls.



Europe's leaders are steadily dragging their joint economies towards depression,

afflicting their competitive relation with the outside world possibly for ever.

Nor can they blame others. They are doing it to themselves, voluntarily, in

obeisance to the gods of confidence, who long ago abandoned them.



Clearly no new idea will dent these dogmatists. Economists are to modern

government what doctors were to tobacco companies, as good as the last fee.

Change will only come, as Chesterton said, with "a sharp blow to the head" and

from a blunt instrument.



That instrument is the ballot. If there is one thing a politician dreads more

than a central banker, it is an election. Greece briefly fell last year under

the spell of the anti-austerity star, Alexis Tsipras. Holland is fiercely

anti-austerity. France saw the anti-austerity left bundle Nicolas Sarkozy out of

office. Spanish austerity is at the mercy of maverick separatists. Italy has

Grillo, with heaven knows what result.



Tomorrow at the Eastleigh byelection, the party of Britain's own Grillo is

predicted to shock the coalition government. Ukip's Nigel Farage may come from

right of stage, but his appeal is similar to Grillo's. Conventional politics has

gone bureaucratically native. The European tier of government is aloof and the

eurozone rigid. One-solution Europe does not fit all. The wildcats have the same

cry: follow me to the forum and throw the bastards out.



Italy has long been Britain's favourite foreign country. Even as its two great

institutions, the republic and the catholic church, stumble into corruption and

immorality, all must be well. This is Italy where even the ungovernable is bella

figura. No one believes this will cease.



Yet wildcat populism always terrifies the existing order. In America it is the

Tea Party and Occupy. In Scandinavia, Holland, Austria and France, a communist,

poujardist or fascist periodically crashes the system. Mosley did it in pre-war

Britain. Since then Powellism, nationalism, Respect, even the odd Liberal has

threatened, for a while, to upset the bipartisan apple cart.



It seldom lasts. Italian politics will establish a new equilibrium. If lucky it

will be outside the euro and on the way to recovery; if not it will be in

lifetime bondage to eurozone bankers. Either way Italy will remember the heady

moment of February 2013, and so should we.



simon.jenkins@guardian.co.uk



