





The fallout from the Anglo Irish Bank tapes, with executives singing Deutschland

uber Alles while joking about German money rescuing the financial institution,

has provoked disgust in the country, a senior ally of chancellor Angela Merkel

has said.



Michael Fuchs, deputy leader of Merkel's Christian Democratic Union party in the

Bundestag, described the recordings as "unbearable".



In a series of phone calls senior bankers at the toxic, debt-ridden bank laugh

about German largesse on the night the Irish government rescued Anglo Irish Bank

from collapse with large injections of cash from European partners, including

Germany.



The outrage in Germany is deeply embarrassing for the current Fine Gael-Labour

coalition in Dublin as the government seeks to reduce the republic's debt burden

to the EU, the European Central Bank and the IMF.



Fuchs told RTE radio yesterday: "We are offended. If you have a feeding hand you

shouldn't bite into it."



He said the remarks were "really dangerous" language as German politicians were

trying to convince local taxpayers to support European countries, such as

Ireland. "It's absolutely unbearable that somebody is talking like this."



In one conversation - taped two days after the 30 September 2008 bank guarantee

- Anglo Irish Bank's disgraced former CEO David Drumm giggles while his

colleague John Bowe recites lines from "Deutschland uber alles".



Bowe accepted in a statement that the language used in the taped recordings of

internal bank conversations "was imprudent and inappropriate".



The behaviour of the Anglo Irish executives has turned them into national hate

figures in the republic and now, it appears, also in the country which has

supplied most of Europe's money to prop up not only the Irish banking system but

also the entire state.



As Anglo Irish Bank moved towards the fiscal abyss, Drumm is heard joking,

"another day, another billion", referring to the flight of deposits out of the

doomed bank before the bank guarantee in September 2008. At the time the outflow

was running at over euros 1bn (£847m) a day.



Meanwhile, the Irish prime minister, Enda Kenny, has said he may have to seek a

referendum asking the Irish people for greater government powers to investigate

the banking crash that almost bankrupted Ireland.



Speaking in the Dail the taoiseach said he was considering a second referendum

that would grant the state more power to hold searching inquiries.



The tapes appear to confirm that Anglo Irish bankers hoodwinked the then Fianna

Fail-led government back in 2008 with a vastly underestimated price for the bank

rescue. John Bowe, then the bank's director of capital markets, is heard on the

tapes explaining where got the figure of euros 7bn needed to save Anglo Irish

from oblivion.



He quips that he picked the figure "out of my arse".



In fact, Anglo Irish Bank's rescue cost the Irish and European taxpayers,

particularly the Germans, euros 30bn.



Captions:



'We are offended. If you have a feeding hand you shouldn't bite into it'



Michael Fuchs, deputy leader of German CDU party



