





If there is one thing that is clear from a lacklustre German election campaign,

it is that the voters are not hungry for change. That's excellent news for the

incumbent chancellor, Angela Merkel, who looks like a shoo-in for a third term

on 22 September. The big question is, who becomes her junior coalition partner:

the current liberals, or Free Democrats (FDP), if they surmount the

5%-of-the-vote hurdle, or a grand coalition with the second-biggest party, the

Social Democrats (SPD)?



If the Germans are voting for no big change in Germany, they will also be voting

for no dramatic shift in Merkel's European policy. Unlikely to disappoint her

voters, she is certain to disappoint her fellow EU leaders.



"However the Germans vote, Berlin's attitude to the EU is not going to change

much," Charles Grant, director of the Centre for European Reform, wrote this

week. Most analysts agree.



Ulrike Guerot, of the European Council on Foreign Relations, in Berlin, said:

"The Germany that many in Europe hope for is not on offer. It is hard to imagine

any new government coalition - or the old one, if it is returned to power -

providing enlightened leadership of a kind that accepts significant short-term

sacrifice to buy into a far more uncertain vision of long-term political

stability. Germany lives in a different world."



EU business has been effectively on hold for months as the union awaits the

outcome of what is by far the biggest political event in Europe this year. The

ballot will be followed by weeks of horse trading and programme-writing as

Merkel weighs up her coalition options.



The pressures on Merkel are high. David Cameron is keen to forge a reformist

alliance that would allow him to "repatriate" powers to Britain from Brussels

before a 2017 referendum on EU membership.



Those hopes are almost certain to be dashed. Any new deal would entail

renegotiating the EU treaties. There is no appetite for that in Brussels or

Paris, and a diminishing one in Berlin. The odds are that Cameron will be

disappointed. He won't be the only one.



The big innovation currently being cooked up in eurozone capitals in response to

the euro crisis is the new system of banking supervision and regulation known as

the banking union. The idea is to make the European Central Bank in Frankfurt

the supervisory authority for the eurozone banking sector, initially the big

banks. That bit is effectively accomplished and comes into force towards the end

of next year.



Its corollary is the tricky part: a resolution authority and fund to deal with

weak or bad banks. That body would decide whether a bank gets wound up or helped

out. For the European commission, the French, the Italians and the Spanish, that

means common fiscal backstops in the eurozone and pooled eurozone funds for

dealing with a banking collapse.



The Germans are resisting, unwilling to have to pay for other countries' bank

failures or repairs and also reluctant to force German banks to contribute to a

resolution fund that could shore up, for example, a Spanish bank.



Enrico Letta, the Italian prime minister, pleaded in Brussels on Monday for

greater German flexibility. "Some degree of risk-sharing" was needed in the

eurozone, he argued.



Consistently, through more than three years of eurozone crisis, Merkel has been

pressed to do more, but her bottom line has always been to refuse German

liability for the faults of others unless German rules are observed.



France is impatient for the German election to be over. On certain issues the

two sides may be nearing common ground: they have both turned against Brussels

and the European commission, and increasingly see the eurozone, as opposed to

the wider EU, as the fulcrum of European integration. It is here that things may

change after the election, but more likely by stealth and small steps.



With EU leaders confident they have weathered the worst of the crisis, Merkel

can claim vindication, and will find little reason to change her approach.



