





David Cameron has clawed back ground from Labour, whose lead over the Tories has

been squeezed to five points, according to the latest Guardian/ICM poll.



After three straight months when it held an eight-point lead, Labour has slipped

back two points to stand at 38%. The Tories have inched up one to 33% and the

Liberal Democrats have edged up two to 15%. Ukip has slipped back one to 6%,

after the record showing of 7% recorded by ICM in November and December.



The fall in support for Ukip comes after the political start to 2013 was

dominated by debate in the buildup to the prime minister's scheduled speech on

Britain's relations with Europe. Cameron will now deliver his speech in London

tomorrow.



The prime minister is expected to say that, if elected with a majority at the

2015 general election, he will offer people a referendum on renewed membership

terms of the EU. These would be negotiated if eurozone leaders asked for a

revision of the Lisbon treaty to underpin new governance arrangements for the

eurozone.



Downing Street believes the lengthy delay in the speech, during which

pro-Europeans have intensified their campaign, has worked to the benefit of the

prime minister, who supports UK membership, though on revised terms. A

YouGov/Sunday Times poll found that supporters of British membership of the EU,

who trailed opponents by 21 points in November, now enjoy a six-point lead.



If the new focus on foreign policy is playing well for the prime minister,

however, the Guardian/ICM survey reveals gathering doubts about a key plank of

the government's strategy on the domestic front: the decoupling of benefits from

inflation, which George Osborne announced in his autumn statement.



ICM asked voters to choose between two views of the chancellor's proposal for a

1% cap on benefit rises. Just 36% agreed with his argument that "squeezing

benefits is fair, as wages for workers are also being squeezed", but 58%

inclined to the case made by the opposition that squeezing benefits and tax

credits "is unfair, as it will hurt the vulnerable, including many people who

work hard for low pay".



No 10 has long been convinced that the "striving" majority of the public resents

the "shirking" minority who rely on welfare, and will thus be concerned that

voters reject its argument in favour of this latest social security cut by a

substantial 22-point margin.



Polls immediately before the autumn statement showed strong support for

attaching stricter conditions to benefit payments.



Last night, Stephen Timms, the shadow employment minister, committed Labour to

uprating benefits in line with inflation. Speaking against the benefits uprating

bill, he said: "Uprating should be in line with inflation, as it always was in

the past."



The survey confirms a continuing gender gap, which will also concern No 10. The

Conservatives are one point ahead of Labour among men, by 36% to 35%, but among

women they languish 16 points behind, 29% to 45%. But the Tories will draw

comfort from their strong showing among voters aged over 65, who are the most

likely to turn out to the polls. Among this group, the Conservatives are ahead

of Labour by 39% to 30%.



ICM Research interviewed a random sample of 1,001 adults aged 18+ on 18-20

January 2013. Interviews were conducted across the country and the results have

been weighted to the profile of all adults. ICM is a member of the British

Polling Council and abides by its rules.



