





Britain's business lobby group will set out its "unequivocal" support for

Britain staying in the European Union today, claiming that membership brings

each household some £3,000 a year.



The CBI said a poll of members around the country showed the vast majority

wanted to remain part of the EU, subject to important reforms. At its annual

conference in London, the group will stress that benefits such as easier access

to export markets, both in Europe and further afield, easily outweigh the costs.



Presenting his "business vision for a reformed EU", CBI director general John

Cridland countered those calling for a so-called "Brexit" by stressing that

being outside the world's largest trading bloc would leave the UK isolated.



David Cameron has promised to put Britain's EU membership to a vote in 2017. The

referendum has caused huge controversy inside the Tory party, which is split

between those MPs who are pushing the prime minister for a vote before the 2015

election and a faction led by the former chancellor Ken Clarke, who has

described the vote as silly and reckless.



The CBI's research could strengthen Cameron's hand inside the Tory party,

especially as it found that more than three-quarters of small and medium-sized

businesses back staying inside the single market. Traditionally, polls have

shown large majorities among large businesses for EU membership against a large

no vote from smaller enterprises.



Cridland said: "We have looked beyond the political rhetoric to examine the pros

and cons of EU membership and British business is unequivocal: the single market

is fundamental to our future."



The group's conclusions credit membership of the bloc with giving Britain access

to European markets of 500 million people, helping cement the UK as the world's

leading financial centre and attracting investment from around the world. It

says that by aggregating research already available it has come up with a

conservative estimate that the benefits amount to 4-5% of GDP, or as much as

£78bn a year, making each household £3,000 better off.



But the group also outlines a number of frustrations. "The EU isn't perfect and

there is a growing unease about the creeping extension of EU authority. Europe

has to become more open, competitive and outward looking if we are to grow and

create opportunities and jobs," Cridland said.



The group is calling on the EU to fully implement a market for services and to

create a digital one, and also to secure trade deals with the US and Japan as

part of talks already under way. It also wants a moratorium on legislation where

there is a case for decisions to be made at national level, such as employment

law.



Caption:



CBI director general John Cridland said departure from the world's largest

trading bloc would leave Britain isolated



