





The challenge facing David Cameron over Europe has been highlighted by Kenneth

Clarke's description of a referendum as a "gamble" and calls from Eurosceptic

Conservatives for a complete repatriation of social and employment laws.



In the runup to the prime minister's long-awaited speech on Europe, Clarke has

warned that referendums are normally proposed by "hangers and floggers".



Meanwhile the Fresh Start group warns that "the status quo is no longer an

option". The backbench body calls for "a new and different relationship" with

the European Union.



Clarke, the most pro-European Tory member of the government who campaigned a

decade ago for Britain to join the euro, warns that the prime minister's

strategy could end in British withdrawal from the EU. Cameron will pledge to

hold a referendum on a "new settlement" which he would negotiate, if elected

with a majority, when a major EU treaty revision takes place to underpin new

eurozone governance arrangements.



Clarke identified a hard core of Tory MPs who want to leave the EU. In an

interview with the Financial Times the minister without portfolio likened them

to Tory supporters of capital punishment in the 1970s who demanded a referendum

on the issue because they could not command a parliamentary majority. "If you

realise you're doomed in parliament you demand a referendum - that's what the

hangers and floggers used to do," he said.



Clarke is to join forces with Lord Mandelson to launch a new pro-European group,

the Centre for British Influence through Europe. "All referenda are a bit of a

gamble," he said. "I don't think we can take a yes vote for granted.



"I think one of the problems is . . . no one has really campaigned very

vigorously for the case for British leadership in the EU for probably a decade

or more."



Clarke warned Britain would damage its interests if it left the EU.



His warnings came as the Fresh Start group called for what it called four

"significant revisions" to treaties governing the EU. The Daily Telegraph

reported that the group will call for:



* A complete repatriation of social and employment laws such as the working time

directive which imposes a 48-hour working week. Britain has an opt-out from that

aspect of the directive.



* A opt-out from all criminal justice measures.



* An "emergency brake" that would give Britain an effective veto over new

financial services regulations.



* An end to the monthly plenary sessions of the European parliament held in

Strasbourg.



Its manifesto says: "If negotiation to repatriate these powers failed, we should

consider the unilateral disapplication of EU social and employment law in

Britain through an act of parliament."



