





David Cameron will try to reach out to former Tory voters who defected to Ukip

in the local elections by characterising next week's Queen's speech as a

concerted attempt to address their concerns over immigration and welfare.



As Tory MPs on the right of the party called for tougher action on Europe and

immigration, Downing Street was preparing to launch a media blitz over the

weekend to show that the government is taking action in key areas highlighted by

Ukip.



The Queen's speech on Wednesday will contain measures to limit benefits to some

immigrants with a particular focus on placing restrictions on access to the NHS.



This is designed to show that the government is taking action ahead of the

lifting of transitional controls on citizens from Romania and Bulgaria, who will

have full rights to work in the EU from next year.



Downing Street is also indicating to Tory MPs that the prime minister is ready

to back a private members' bill in the new session of parliament that would

legislate for an



in/out referendum on Britain's EU membership after the next election.



No 10 acknowledged that it could not introduce any bill authorising an EU

referendum as a government measure in the face of Liberal Democrat opposition.

"It is impractical to bring it in as a government measure," one source said.



Downing Street regarded the results in the English local elections as a mixed

blessing. The Tories suffered the loss of 335 seats, comfortably within the

range predicted by psephologists, who said the party was bound to suffer on the

grounds that the seats were last contested in 2009 when Cameron was riding on a

high the year before the general election.



But on the downside, many Tory voters defected to Ukip, ensuring that the Tories

lost control of bastions in Lincolnshire and Norfolk. They had more success

elsewhere, as they held on in counties such as Hertfordshire and Somerset.



The signals from No 10 came as Tories on the right called on Cameron to

acknowledge the way in which Ukip is resonating. Sir Gerald Howarth, the

Thatcherite former defence minister, lamented the loss of a Conservative

councillor in Hampshire and then added in a tweet: "We need to take tougher

action on serious concerns of the public on immigration and Europe."



John Baron, the Tory MP for Basildon and Billericay, who is demanding

legislation during this parliament for an in/out EU referendum, said Ukip should

no longer be seen as a protest party. "Some of its members have genuine concerns

about the EU which we need to address," he said.



Michael Gove, the education secretary, cautioned that there would be no lurch to

the right. "There is no - and I don't think there should be - fundamental

change," he told Radio 4's The World at One.



But Gove, who said the government has taken action in many areas highlighted by

Ukip, acknowledged it was taking time for changes to be noticed. He said: "When

it comes to the concerns that voters have who didn't vote Conservative - some of

whom voted Ukip, some of whom didn't vote at all - I think there has been a gap

between the decisions we have taken and the implementation on the ground which,

naturally, will cause some people to say to this government: we need to see

results.



"We are seeing results. There was hard parliamentary pounding in order to make

sure we could change the welfare system so that once more we had an approach to

benefits which rewarded and incentivised work. It is only this week that the

universal credit is being rolled out."



Gove also warned against any attempt to overthrow the prime minister after some

defeated councillors questioned his leadership. "I think that any of my

colleagues who want to indulge in leadership speculation should spend the

weekend reading the history books and consider if leadership speculation has

ever helped any political party to enhance its position with the voters. The

idea of changing the leader is bonkeroony."



Gove spoke out after Graham Marsh, who lost his seat in Lincolnshire after a

Ukip surge, told The World at One that his "rockbed supporters" were angry about

the "half promise" of an EU referendum and the time spent on legalising equal

marriage. Asked how long Cameron should have to make changes, Marsh said: "I

think he has had long enough."



Senior Tory MPs cautioned that Cameron should act with care as he responds to

Ukip. One MP said: "I suspect the prime minister's head will tell him it is no

good chasing after Ukip, which is basically feeding crocodiles. If we could wave

a magic wand and put an EU referendum bill in the Queen's speech, would it have

a magical effect? I doubt it. We need to concentrate on bread-and-butter issues.



"It is entirely self-defeating to go after David Cameron. The Conservative party

often veers between complacency and panic. Colleagues are in the process of

absorbing what has happened. There will no doubt be a lot of chatter behind the

scenes over the weekend."



Tim Farron, the Lib Dem president, said the party had been "obliterated" in the

South Shields byelection, where it came seventh. But the party said it performed

well in certain areas, such as Cheltenham, where it has MPs and a large number

of councillors.



Nick Clegg said: "It is not good to lose hardworking councillors, as we have

done in these elections. The Liberal Democrats are on a journey from a party of

protest to a party of government. Actually, the pattern that has emerged shows

very clearly that where we have MPs, where we have Liberal Democrats out on the

doorstep setting out our side to the story, we are holding our own and in some

areas actually making gains."



The Lib Dems saw their vote fall on average by 12 points. John Curtice,

professor of politics at the University of Strathclyde, said the loss of just

124 seats "flattered to deceive" because Lib Dems were mostly fighting Tories

whose vote share also fell.



Jonathan Freedland, page 43



