





David Cameron will use EU reforms to repatriate and weaken workers' rights,

Frances O'Grady, the new leader of the Trades Union Congress will warn today .



Speaking at a conference in Madrid she will say that, if the prime minister gets

his way, employees across Europe may no longer receive health and safety

protection, equal treatment as part-time workers and women, or paid holidays.



The TUC general secretary's words come after Nick Clegg yesterday warned his

coalition partner that a promise to hold a referendum on EU membership risked

damaging the fragile economy.



Cameron said on Wednesday that he wanted to stay in the EU but pledged to claw

back powers and offer voters the choice of a new relationship or an exit by the

end of 2017 if the Conservatives were back in power in 2015. His stance

delighted Eurosceptic backbenchers.



O'Grady will tell the European Trades Union Congress that Cameron has already

made it easier for employers to sack people and more difficult for workers to

get justice in the courts.



She will state: "There's one set of workers' rights David Cameron can't touch.

Those are the rights provided for by social Europe - paid holidays, health and

safety, equal treatment for part-time workers and women, protection when a

business is sold off, and a voice at work. The prime minister wants to

repatriate those rights, and not because he thinks he can improve them. Cameron

wants to make it easier for bad employers to undercut good ones, drive down

wages, and make people who already work some of the longest hours in Europe work

even longer. To do that he needs agreement from the rest of Europe."



She will urge European unions to mount campaigns in their own countries against

Cameron's reforms. "What (he) is trying to do isn't just opt out of social

Europe, he wants to undercut it."



Clegg yesterday dismissed prospects of securing a significant renegotiation and

suggested that Cameron should concentrate on the economy.



Speaking on BBC1's Andrew Marr Show, the Liberal Democrat leader said Cameron

was engaged in an "arcane" debate about the precise terms of the membership of

the EU. "It is not in the national interest when we have this fragile recovery,

when we have a very open economy which is very dependent on investors in the car

industry and the banking system and so on. You must always, when you are trying

to piece together a recovery, foster those precarious conditions of greater

confidence in the economy."



He claimed most businesses he had spoken to were worried by the uncertainty

concerning a referendum and its consequences. "Is it deliverable to, in effect,

say to the rest of the EU: we want to do all the bits that we like, but can you

keep all the stuff that we think is not good for the economy? That is not

plausible."



Grant Shapps, the Tory chairman, said the government was not ignoring the

country's economic position by developing a new policy on Europe. "Europe is a

big central issue which has a major effect on most people's daily lives," he

told Dermot Murnaghan on Sky News.



Later, speaking to the Daily Telegraph, he raised the possibility of Britain

leaving the EU if renegotiations fail. "I think most people in this country

agree that Europe isn't what we originally signed up for. If we can't get any

powers back at all, then we'll be in a different position," he said.



Meanwhile, Ed Miliband, Labour's leader, defended his opposition to a referendum

on the EU. "Right now it doesn't make sense to commit to a referendum years

ahead.



"Has (Cameron) changed his mind because he's changed his view about the national

economic interest? Or has he changed his mind because he's worried about Ukip? I

contend it's the second, not the first."



A ComRes poll for the Sunday Mirror and Independent on Sunday put the Tories up

five points on 33% following Cameron's speech. Labour was unchanged, with 39%,

but its lead had slipped from 11 points to six in a month. Ukip's support has

fallen.



Captions:



TUC chief Frances O'Grady says UK workers are already more vulnerable



