





The mood in the Conservative party on Thursday night will be determined at least

as much by how well Ukip does in the local elections as by how badly the Tories

do. Losses to Labour in the hundreds are expected, given where the two parties

start these elections from. But it is the smaller number of seats that Ukip

seems likely to win that will have a disproportionate impact on the Conservative

psyche.



Many in the party have for some time been preoccupied with how to combat the

threat of Ukip. But that preoccupation has become an obsession since David

Cameron's promise of an "in-out" referendum on Europe failed to dent Ukip's

appeal. A strong Ukip candidate and a campaign that denied the Conservatives a

morale-boosting gain in the Eastleigh byelection added to the pressure. If Ukip

adds sizeably to its number of county councillors on Thursday, it will do more

than rub salt in Tory wounds; it will start another round of soul-searching over

what to do about Ukip.



The Tories should start by putting the challenge posed by the party into

perspective. The Ukip challenge is not, first and foremost, a problem about

Europe. As Michael Ashcroft pointed out earlier this week, if Nigel Farage's

primary aim really is to withdraw Britain from the EU, then taking votes away

from the one party prepared to offer that option after the next election is a

funny way of achieving it. Polls show that it is not the Europe issue - or

indeed any policies at all - that drive voters to Ukip.



The heart of the party's appeal is that it prefers life as it once was in

Britain to what it is today. It is this emotional basis that makes dealing with

Ukip in government so difficult. The problem is that there is an irreducible

core of voters in Britain who simply regard as being beneath contempt the

compromises made by any administration as a result of the law, or international

obligations or (for now) a coalition agreement.



These people have seen their lives and what they can expect for themselves and

their families change for the worse in recent years. When Cameron talks about

the global race - the opportunities that lie ahead and the risks of being left

behind - these people look at their personal race, and fear it has already been

run. They feel they have been abandoned by all parties. It is no accident that

Ukip does disproportionately well among older, non-graduate, white men.



The ranks of these disaffected voters have been swelled not only by concerns

over immigration and migration during the recession, but also by what they see

as the failure of the political system to deal with everything from the row over

MPs' expenses and the rise of the "something for nothing society" to the banking

crisis and flagrancy of bonus culture.



Cameron has to take note of these frustrations, but he also has to distinguish

between those who are impatient with his lack of progress as prime minister and

those who are voting Ukip as a premeditated act to put themselves beyond the

reach of mainstream politics.



In other words, he has to address those who are willing to take yes for an

answer and find practical ways of demonstrating how the future can be better and

fairer, rather than get trapped into making empty promises about returning to a

past which probably never existed.



The Tory strategy must be about pitching a big tent rather than trying to huddle

for warmth inside an ever smaller one; given the electoral arithmetic, Cameron

doesn't have the luxury of choosing between those who've defected to Ukip since

2010 or pro-coalition voters who supported the Lib Dems at the last election.



Cameron needs both and more besides to win next time. That means offering a

clear vision of what Britain will look like when it emerges from austerity, who

he wants to see sharing in what he used to call the "proceeds of growth" and

reassurance that the rewards of recovery will be shared fairly. Above all, he

has to stick to his guns, particularly after nights like tomorrow. To stand any

chance of winning in May 2015, Cameron has to make clear now that there can be

no turning back.



Rick Nye is strategy director of Populus and a former director of the

Conservative Research Department



