





For centuries, Britain has developed economically through being an open,

outward-looking country. Today, the economy has a high level of global

integration. The UK is the world's fifth largest exporter of goods and services,

and we attract more foreign direct investment than any other European country.



While I am more worried than Mark Carney, the governor of the Bank of England,

about the risks of becoming over-reliant on financial services for growth, I do

acknowledge that 60% of City-based firms are in London because of the single

market, and that is important to defend because of Britain's ability to

influence its rules.



However, it is clear that the UK's future prosperity will require us to adapt to

new realities. Over recent decades we have seen a rapid shift in the centre of

gravity of the world economy. The combined GDP of emerging economies has already

overtaken that of the west, and the gap is widening. Meanwhile, new technologies

are creating demand for greater investment in skills and infrastructure and

making it easier to relocate supply chains overseas.



There are fantasists on the right who dream of a lost world of global empire and

believe we can walk away from the successful trading block on our doorsteps. The

opposite is true. We should take careful note of today's report by the

Confederation of British Industry, which stresses the importance of continued EU

membership. Eight out of 10 firms surveyed said they would vote to stay in the

EU if there was a referendum tomorrow. The report estimated that each British

household derives annual benefits of about £3,000 a year from EU membership.

That compares with an annual net contribution per person of just over £110 to

the EU budget.



Significantly, the report concludes that far from acting as a constraint, the EU

serves to anchor the UK's global trade. By being part of a group that is

pursuing an outward-looking approach to trade, it is easier for British firms to

export and invest internationally. The best way to retain the UK's place as a

competitive economy is to work with like-minded European countries to maintain a

liberal approach to trade. There is now the prospect of a significant trade and

investment deal with the US, which could bring as much as £10bn to the UK

economy, and comparable trade agreements with Japan and India. By harnessing the

collective weight of the EU as the world's largest exporter, importer and

investor, there is the prospect of far better deals for British exports than we

could ever hope for alone.



Closer to home, we have to take the lead in completing the EU single market in

services and the digital and telecoms sector. Britain's 220,000 online retailers

already export more than the rest of Europe's e-retailers combined. Bringing the

EU single market into line with the internet age will allow us to build on these

strengths and open up a market of 500 million consumers to our online companies.

For those who complain about continental Europeans in our mix, it has to be

pointed out that the single market embodies four freedoms: trading goods and

services and freedoms of movement for capital and workers. That is what free

trade means.



There are, of course, regulatory barriers to business within the EU - as indeed

there are nationally. There is no justification for jettisoning important

environment, worker and consumer protections, but of course regulation should be

proportionate and moderate. The need for such reform is widely recognised across

Europe. The CBI report is a compelling business-based argument for the UK

remaining an active member of the EU. Millions of jobs and livelihoods depend on

it.



Vince Cable is a Liberal Democrat and secretary of state for business,

innovation and skills



