





Labour has forged a 12-point lead over the Conservatives for the first time in

almost a decade, according to a Guardian/ICM poll.



Ed Miliband's party stands at 41% of the vote, up three points on ICM's January

figure, and the Tories are on just 29%, having slipped back four from 33% last

month. Meanwhile, the Liberal Democrats have sunk two points, to 13%, whereas

Ukip has inched up three to 9% - setting a new record for Nigel Farage's

anti-European outfit in the Guardian/ICM series.



Underlying the dire numbers for the Conservatives are signs of a gender divide

that will concern No 10. Among men Labour enjoys a seven-point lead over the

Tories (36%-29%), but among women the gap is 26 points (51%-25%).



Last month's coalition proposals to shake up childcare provision were aimed at

attracting the female vote. The crushing two-to-one split in the female vote

against the Tories is far too large to be explained by any quirk of this month's

ICM's sample. In January's poll - a better month for the Tories - whereas prime

minister's party was actually one point ahead of Labour among men (36%-35%),

among women it was already 16 points behind (29%-45%).



The Labour lead is the biggest - and the Conservative vote share the smallest -

in the polling series since May 2003, during the brief political bounce for Tony

Blair which came between the felling of Saddam Hussein's statue in Baghdad and

first stirrings of civil war in Iraq and arguments about dodgy dossiers.



With his party plumbing the sort of depths associated with the second half of

the John Major era, David Cameron will be dismayed with the continuing surge in

Ukip support, a challenge on the right flank which the prime minister's recent

speech proposing a referendum on the EU was designed to head off. In the runup

to this month's Eastleigh byelection yesterday's poll suggests that Conservative

hopes in the seat formerly held by Chris Huhne will have to rest more upon the

weakness of their coalition partners than anything else.



Labour's 12-point lead with ICM is larger than leads of nine and 10 points

recorded by two other polls reported by the Sunday Times and the Observer at the

weekend, and it is striking because ICM's methodology - which has delivered many

impressive predictions in past elections - adjusts the figures for "shy Tory

voters", the name given to the difference between the proportion who vote for

the party in elections and the proportion who say they will vote for the party

in opinion polls.



The detail of the new poll warns that Labour's new lead is not solid. The

sluggish economy will be the decisive battleground of the next election, and

after Britain's dive into a fresh economic contraction in the final quarter of

2012, the opposition might have expected to be winning the blame game. Instead,

more voters point the finger at the last Labour government than the coalition.



Asked to name the chief culprit for the economic slowdown, 29% identify Labour's

"debts . . . racked up to finance unsustainable spending". This is the same as

when the question was asked last May.



While Labour has failed to make any progress in this respect since May, the

coalition has slipped back. At that time only 17% of voters blamed government

cuts, compared with 23% now, whereas 24% identified "chill economic winds

blowing in from the eurozone", a proportion that has now shrunk to 16%, as the

crisis in the single currency has entered a less acute phase. The 21% of voters

who blame bankers for "refusing to provide loans" that firms need for investment

remains unchanged.



Among other assorted parties, the Scottish National party is at 2% (down one on

the month) while Plaid Cymru holds steady on 1%. The Greens' numbers also remain

unchanged, at 2%, while the British National party picks up a point, to stand at

2%.



ICM Research interviewed a random sample of 1001 adults aged 18+ by telephone on

8-10 February 2013. Interviews were conducted across the country and the results

have been weighted to the profile of all adults. ICM is a member of the British

Polling Council and abides by its rules.



Captions:



The Guardian/ICM poll shows Labour at 41% with the Tories on 29%; the Liberal

Democrats have sunk two points to 13%



