





Tory Eurosceptics are running a "Soprano-style protection racket" in the

Conservative party in which they are threatening to burn down the house unless

David Cameron caves into their demands, Lord Mandelson has claimed.



As the former Tory chancellor Lord Howe warned the prime minister was losing

control of his party over Europe, Mandelson described the Eurosceptics as the

"provisional wing" of the Conservatives.



Jeremy Hunt, the health secretary, hit back at Howe. Speaking on The Andrew Marr

Show on BBC1, he said: "I don't think those views actually represent the

reality. The substance is that the Conservative party says if we are going to be

successful in that global race we need to renegotiate that relationship with

Europe and give the British people a say."



But Mandelson echoed Howe's warning, though he used a more dramatic analogy. He

told the Marr Show: "We all know what's going on inside the Conservative party.

The UK Isolation party and their fellow travellers in the Conservatives are sort

of operating a Soprano-style protection racket inside the Conservative party.

They are saying: 'Do what we want, give us what we are demanding, or we are

going to burn your home down.'"



The former Northern Ireland secretary even appeared to liken the Eurosceptics to

the provisional wing of the Irish republican movement. He said: "Just because

one wing - the provisional wing - of the Conservative party want to bring down

their leader and change their party's policy and are using this as an issue to

do so is not a good reason to hold a referendum."



Mandelson endorsed Ed Miliband's position on an EU referendum. "On this issue

they are right. They are saying yes to a referendum if there is some significant

change in the relationship. But no, not an in-out referendum just for the sake

of having a referendum."



Hunt's and Mandelson's interventions came after Howe lambasted Cameron over

Europe.



He wrote in the Observer: "Sadly, by making it clear in January that he opposes

the current terms of UK membership of the EU, the prime minister has opened a

Pandora's box politically and seems to be losing control of his party in the

process.



"The ratchet-effect of Euroscepticism has now gone so far that the Conservative

leadership is in effect running scared of its own backbenchers, let alone Ukip,

having allowed deep anti-Europeanism to infect the very soul of the party."



