





David Cameron is fighting plans to place a commitment to reducing income

inequality in the developing world into a major UN report that will set out a

series of targets to replace the Millennium Development Goals (MDGs).



Amid fears that the commitment could create "perverse incentives", and actually

slow down the battle to eradicate extreme poverty, the prime minister said the

UN should focus on "measurable, concrete" goals. These include ending extreme

poverty and hunger by 2030.



On the final leg of his three-day trip to the US, the prime minister arrived in

New York yesterday for the last meetings of the panel that is due to report to

the UN secretary general by the end of the month on the successors to the MDGs.



The trip has inevitably been overshadowed by the furore back at Westminster over

a possible EU referendum.



Cameron stopped off on his way to the UN to appear on a new Routemaster

doubledecker bus with Prince Harry as part of the Great campaign that promotes

British culture and industry around the world.



He then headed to the UN, where members of the high-level panel are facing

strong pressure from aid agencies to place a clear commitment to reduce income

inequality in the report. President Ellen Johnson Sirleaf of Liberia, one of

Cameron's co-chairs, has been lobbied strongly to include the plan, which would

commit developed countries to meet targets to reduce income inequality.



Downing Street believes this is a mistaken approach and says the focus should

instead be on agreeing 10 goals, to be achieved by 2030, which it regards as the

"building blocks" to tackle poverty in the developing world. The goals are:

ending extreme poverty, ending hunger, ensuring the provision of safe and

sustainable water supplies, stopping preventable deaths, ensuring a school place

for every girl and boy, empowering girls and women, delivering infrastructure

and energy, boosting jobs, ensuring access to justice and ensuring effective and

open government.



A No 10 source said: "The prime minister wants to keep the focus on measurable

concrete actions that would help you to alleviate poverty and keep the focus on

being something people could judge whether or not we are delivering.



"Obviously we want to be lifting up the world's poorest. But the best way to do

that is to have more specific actions rather than some overarching high level

message. We should not be seeking to create perverse incentives that would bring

people downwards rather than lifting people up."



Downing Street says the prime minister is happy with the way the panel report is

proceeding. But as he arrived in the US, Cameron indicated that he needed to

maintain pressure when he said: "I need to be there in order to nail down some

simple, clear commitments that everyone can get behind as we look to the

successors to the millennium development goals."



Cameron's talks at the White House this week focused in part on the G8 summit he

is to host in Northern Ireland next month.



The prime minister will today announce that Britain is to use its G8 presidency

to agree a new international approach on dementia, which affects 35.6 million

people in the world. The World Health Organisation estimates this will nearly

double every 20 years, to 65.7 million in 2030 and 115.4 million in 2050.



Britain will host a G8 dementia summit in London in September, while Britain and

the US are to work together to improve research into the condition. "Dementia is

a devastating disease - not just for sufferers but for their families and

friends too. And as more people live longer, it is fast becoming one of the

biggest social and healthcare challenges we face," Cameron said.



"Families, communities, health systems and their budgets will increasingly be

strained as the number affected increases and so we need to do all we can to

improve how we research, diagnose and treat the disease. That's why we're using

our G8 to bring together health ministers, clinical researchers and healthcare

companies.



The prime minister's trip to the US has been overshadowed in large part by the

Tory rebellion over Europe back home. Downing Street was irritated when Michael

Gove bolstered Eurosceptics on Sunday, the day of Cameron's departure for the

US, by saying he would vote to leave the EU if a referendum were held now. But

No 10 was delighted when Barack Obama said it would be wrong to leave the EU

before the prime minister has embarked on his renegotiation of Britain's

membership terms. The president told Cameron he was planning to say something on

Europe - if asked - and ran his comments past the prime minister.



Speaking at a reception at the Milk photographic studios, the prime minister

hailed the close economic partnership between Britain and the US, though he

joked that the UK falls behind in one controversial area. Saying that Britain

and the US will be beaten in the "global race" on low wages and other areas and

referring to the shale gas fracking industry in the US, he said: "We are not

going to be able to compete on our mineral resources, although frankly I am

pretty jealous of your fracking success here in the US."



Captions:



A new London Routemaster bus carrying Prince Harry and David Cameron arrives on

a promotional visit to New York Photograph: Emmanuel Dunand/AFP/Getty Images



