





Nick Clegg will today call for the rules of the EU's single market to be

rewritten to allow Britain and other countries outside the eurozone to be

allowed to block changes proposed by members of the single currency.



In a major speech on the EU, the deputy prime minister will say that he now

expects a referendum on Britain's EU membership to be held in the coming years.



The deputy prime minister will warn that leaving the EU would be "economic

suicide". But he will indicate that the Liberal Democrats might be able to find

common ground with the Tories in negotiations on the future of the EU.



David Cameron has said that Britain will fight hard to protect the single market

if the Lisbon treaty is amended to allow eurozone members to underpin changes to

the governance of the single currency. Clegg will make clear that he shares the

prime minister's view that no member state should have a veto should be amended

to ensure that the 17 eurozone members cannot force through changes against the

will of the countries outside the single currency.



Clegg will say: "Next time there is treaty change I will advocate new safeguards

guaranteeing that - whenever a reform might impact on the single market -

Euro-ins and Euro-outs have an equal say."



His proposals are drawn from the successful Treasury negotiations over the EU's

banking union. George Osborne and Cameron succeeded in introducing a double

majority rule which meant that no change could be introduced without the consent

of euro and non-euro member states.



In his speech Clegg will say that he thinks Cameron is wrong to propose a

referendum on an arbitrary timetable in 2017. He will say that the Lib Dems

still believe that a referendum should only be held if there is a change in the

relationship between Britain and the EU.



But the deputy prime minister will make clear that he expects a referendum will

be held. He will say: "The parties differ on the timing. The Conservative party

want one in 2017 : it's a date chosen for internal party management as much as

anything else. The Liberal Democrats believe it will be far better to have the

referendum when a serious change to Europe's rules, affecting the UK, arises.

But we all agree that it will happen at some point or another."



Clegg is highly critical of Tories and others who want to leave the EU. He will

say: "Let me be absolutely clear: leaving the EU would be economic suicide. You

cannot overstate the damage it would do to British livelihoods and prosperity.

Three million British jobs are linked to the single market . As a member we are

part of the world's biggest borderless market place, made up of 500 million

people. It's now the largest economy in the world - ahead of the United States -

and it's where we do around half of all our trade."



Captions:



Nick Clegg says leaving the EU would be 'economic suicide' as it would damage

British livelihoods and prosperity



