





On Friday MPs will vote on whether to give the British people their first say on

the European Union for almost 40 years. The EU referendum private members' bill

being proposed by Conservative MP James Wharton could have been a great moment

for Britain's parliament, undermined in recent years by expenses and lobbying

scandals. It could have been one of those critical moments when MPs put aside

partisan differences for the common good. But it won't be.



The Conservatives have chosen to make their bill all blue. One by one, Labour

MPs who joined us in supporting the Labour for a Referendum campaign have been

rebuffed. The first prime minister to promise a referendum on the EU since

Harold Wilson is now in danger of becoming a major obstacle to one actually

happening.



The bill will, of course, pass easily on Friday. But it will do so with meagre

cross-party support. Bringing Labour on board would have given it a fighting

chance while it goes through committee and then returns to the Commons for

another vote in the autumn. However, David Cameron's partisan meddling with this

backbencher's bill has left many MPs from other parties in a position where they

feel they simply cannot support it; and that means it will struggle to become

law.



I have spent a good deal of my adult life campaigning for an EU referendum. I

have done so because as a businessman - I founded and am the chair of the

consumer products and shopping channel company JML - I feel the EU too often

hinders and frustrates economic growth in Britain; and because as a British

citizen, I think Brussels intrudes into too many aspects of our daily lives. But

mostly I have done so because the organisation Britain joined in 1973 has become

a very different animal, and it's only right that the general public get their

say on these huge changes.



Regular polls and the meteoric rise of Ukip have shown that Britain's membership

of the EU is a crucial matter not just for Conservative voters. In the past few

months one of the campaigns I chair, Business for Britain, has demonstrated that

there is a strong feeling in the business community that Britain's relationship

with Brussels must undergo a fundamental change. I helped set up Labour for a

Referendum because I feel the Labour party will soon also recognise the

imperative for a new deal from the EU. Indeed, it seems the shadow cabinet is

now seriously considering backing a referendum in the coming months.



Yet, despite all this evidence that the EU issue stretches across partisan,

generational and personal boundaries, the Conservatives have made only scant

effort to embrace this new cross-party reality. Unfortunately, the referendum

bill now looks more like a Tory PR operation than a genuine movement for

constitutional change. Unhappily, it gives greater credence to the suspicion

that Cameron's promise of a referendum in January was not because he believes it

is the right thing to do, but rather because he wanted to placate his vociferous

backbenchers. I'm pleased that Labour's hesitance to match his pledge is

seemingly based on ensuring it would be held at a time that would not be

detrimental to the British economy.



There is still time for Cameron. Time to reach out to Labour and allow James

Wharton to build up the undeniable cross-party support that exists. With greater

numbers of Labour MPs coming around to the idea of a referendum, and party

advisers openly preparing the way for a Labour pledge before 2015, the door is

open for the sort of coalition the country can be proud of to vote through a

referendum and let the people decide on the EU.



But will they dare?



John Mills is the founder and chair of JML and a Labour party donor



