





EU citizens leaving London on Eurostar only faced weather delays of up to 20

minutes on their journeys home yesterday - not a four-year wait for a referendum

.



That might explain the sympathetic response some travellers expressed towards

the UK government's position, although Michele Gentelet, from Paris, heading

home with three grandchildren, was blunt.



"Mr Cameron is not right. He takes things he wants in Europe but refuses what he

doesn't", said the 68-year-old cultural consultant at the Pompidou Centre. "In

Europe, he thinks, every country is below Britain. He talks Europe and acts only

in the interests of Great Britain."



Samuel Cohen, a film sound mixer living in the French capital was more

understanding of Britain's stance. "I think if there is a referendum and people

say what they want, it is a good attitude. There are people in France who don't

know where Europe is going. We don't even know where we are going with the

socialist government because a lot of people are running away from France,

particularly those with money. I am sure if there was a referendum in France

now, no (to EU membership) would win."



Cohen, 54, returning to Paris with his wife, Jacqueline, maintained French

people had already shown they had not "wanted Europe" in a referendum held by

President Jacques Chirac on the European constitution in 2005. It was adopted by

his successor Nicolas Sarkozy by signing the Lisbon treaty. "All the politicians

were saying support it, pushing people, which is normal."



Heading home for Lille, teacher Tania Carpenter, 35, said: "It would be a shame

(if Britain left). The British have always been pretty much apart but Europe

without Britain wouldn't seem like Europe any more. The question is will other

countries leave if Britain leaves?"



Countries went "for the whole package" of give and take with other members, she

added. "I don't think the French have been quite as picky as the British but

then you have your own currency so you are not a full part of Europe."



Falco Mooren, 39, a maintenance manager on Dutch railways from Utrecht, said

Britain did not always seem very co-operative. "I think people realise we may

get to the stage where we get a Europe of two speeds."



In the Netherlands, he believed, "only a very small minority" would want to

leave the EU, "but it is fully open for debate whether the structure we have is

right or not. It is not a question of in or out. I think people understand the

perspective of British people. There are serious questions as to whether Europe

is working. But with the English, the debate is not seen as very constructive.

It becomes a threat to leave rather than a debate on making things work better."



The Belgians at St Pancras seemed more interested in talking about the failings

of their own government which took nearly 500 days to form last year. "Sometimes

I think it is better for Belgium to leave the EU as well," said student Roseline

Suy, 19, from Antwerp.



Captions:



Virginia Gorlez, a nurse, and Tania Carpenter, a teacher, both from Lille

Photograph: David Levene for the Guardian



