





David Cameron faced growing Tory pressure on Europe last night when the former

cabinet minister Michael Portillo threw his weight behind the call by Lord

Lawson for Britain to leave the EU.



As Boris Johnson entered the fray, by saying Britain should be prepared to quit

if it fails to secure better membership terms, Portillo said he fervently hopes

the British people have the guts to vote no.



The intervention by a second Tory grandee came as Charles Moore, Margaret

Thatcher's official biographer, revealed that the late prime minister came to

believe after she left office that Britain should quit the EU. Writing in this

week's issue of the Spectator, Moore says that Thatcher kept her opinion private

after she was advised that her views would push her to the fringes of public

life.



The call this week by Lawson, Thatcher's longest-serving chancellor, for Britain

to leave the EU transformed the debate in the Conservative party by providing

cover for MPs who felt nervous about speaking out.



Portillo today adds fuel to the fire by saying that Britain must leave the EU or

risk finding that it has no choice in the future but to join the euro and to

enter political union with the rest of the EU.



Writing in the Times, which also carried Lawson's article earlier this week,

Portillo says: "The referendum, were it to occur, would not be simply about

withdrawing from the EU or going on as we are. It would really be about pulling

out, or in due course entering political union.



"That is why I would vote no and I fervently hope that the British have more

guts than those who govern us, and more than those who govern us think we have."



Portillo says Lawson is wrong to assert that Britain will have a referendum on

EU membership. Cameron pledged in his speech on the EU in January that he would

hold a referendum by 2017 after negotiating a series of reforms to the EU with

fellow European leaders.



But the former defence secretary writes: "I have not been impressed by Mr

Cameron's pledge. Given his party's electoral prospects, I doubt if he expects

to have to deliver on it. But in any case, he seems to have decided already that

Britain should stay in."



Johnson added to the pressure on Cameron, who claims his strategy is designed to

stabilise Britain's membership in a reformed EU, by saying Britain may have to

leave. The London mayor told the Times that it was "much less clear" that

Britain would suffer if it left.



