





Ukip's surge to 28% in Eastleigh, its best ever result in a byelection, leaves

the Conservatives scrambling to assess the root causes of Ukip's popularity and

whether its cheerful amateur leader Nigel Farage truly has the potential to

deprive the oldest political machine in British politics of as many as 40 seats

in a general election.



Cameron's nightmare is that Ukip now owns the potent cocktail of EU-related

issues, including migration and wage squeeze, and so can split the Eurosceptic

right in 2015 - just as the SDP crippled Labour in the mid-80s. For the first

time in a century the Conservative party has lost monopoly control of the right.



Farage is already promising to put up 2,000 candidates in the May county council

elections. Ukip could well come first next year in the European parliament

elections, which are run on a proportional system.



Some Tories such as the former whip Michael Fabricant, in his leaked November

discussion paper, urged Cameron to recognise that the real Ukip threat rests in

"stealing votes at general election rather than posing an actual threat to take

any one seat". He argued that Ukip started to split the right at the 2010

election. "On a realistic estimate Ukip by standing and taking a mere 3-4% of

the vote, the Conservatives could lose 20 to 30 seats," Fabricant argued.



He pointed out: "In the European elections in 2009 they became the second party,

overtaking Labour and gaining 13 seats and 16.5% of the vote. Fast forward a

year to the 2010 general election, and Ukip stood in 572 seats and took 3.1% of

the popular vote."



Yesterday Fabricant emphasised that the Conservative party now had to respond.

In a series of tweets he said: "Everyone from the PM downwards must focus on the

economy, immigration, crime, Europe and not allow other side policies to

distract.



"Of course, liberal (small 'l') policies do not distract government from the

core issues, but they are seen to do so by the electorate. With Ukip clearly

announcing policies the public want to hear, we must do the same."



Ukip, as Eastleigh showed, has pretty well broken through. A longer campaign,

and Ukip could have gatecrashed Westminster. Fabricant in his November paper

said Cameron needed to respond to the Ukip threat by promising an EU referendum,

and seeking an electoral pact with Farage. Cameron did promise the referendum,

and put up a Eurosceptic candidate in Maria Hutchings - yet it gave no

protection from a Ukip surge.



Moreover, the idea of a Ukip-Con pact was yesterday ruled out, not only by

Farage but also by Michael Gove. Personal relations between Farage and Cameron

are poisonous.



Some say, "Ukip is for people who would like to vote BNP, but shop at M&S." But

the polling work done by Lord Ashcroft, the former Conservative vice-chairman,

suggests something more inchoate than racism, or even anti-Europeanism. In his

influential study of Ukip voters titled They Are Thinking What We Are Thinking,

he said his research showed "discussion amongst Ukip voters and considerers was

dominated by what they saw as the twin themes of immigration and welfare, much

more than Europe.



"But many complained that migrants from within the EU and outside had changed

the character of their local area beyond recognition. Recession and austerity

brought their complaints into sharper focus ." He went on: "They do not think

mainstream politicians are willing or able to keep their promises or change

things for the better. Ukip, with its single unifying theory of what is wrong

and how to put it right, has obvious attractions for them."



In the introduction to a poll on Eastleigh published on Thursday, Ashcroft

writes: "The Ukip attraction . . . reflects a frustration with the political

class and with the way they think things are going in Britain. Our task is not

to become more like Ukip, the party of easy answers, but to be the party of

government that people want to vote for." But one greater danger for Farage is

that he will now come under less benign media scrutiny, and that can be

dangerous, as the Liberal Democrats have discovered.



Ukip make the Lib Dems look like an oasis of normality. Blogs abound describing

the obscure factional fighting and legal challenges that disfigure Ukip's

internal politics. Some of its MEPs have ended up in jail for expenses fiddles,

been expelled or, like their South East England MEP Marta Andreasen, defected to

the Tories. She described Farage as a "Stalinist dictator with a problem about

women".



Another defector, David Campbell-Bannerman, said Ukip had "become very much a

one-man band and a bit of a cult". Farage's own views, if more widely known,

might repel some voters. He writes in his autobiography that "20% of the UK's

teachers should be sacked because they are useless functionaries. Parents,

teachers and politicians have cowered away from their responsibilities."



Farage loves the limelight, and generally receives sympathetic interviews

because he is quotable and engaging, but whether he will love it as much in six

months' time is unlikely. For after Eastleigh he is now playing in the big

league.



Jonathan Freedland, page 43



Leader comment, page 44



