





'I am," said David Cameron in response to a question about bees, "the life

patron of the Oxfordshire Beekeepers' Association!" "Resign!" yelled a Labour

voice. Possibly whoever it was imagined the PM was at last contemplating Plan

Bee. It was the only lightish moment in a dire prime minister's questions. Oh,

David Amess had a query about his 101-year-old mother wanting Cameron to bring

the EU referendum forward so she could vote. But that's the kind of gag that

amuses MPs and very few others.



How did Ed Miliband get things so wrong? It was the first PMQs for five weeks -

thanks to a long Easter holiday and Margaret Thatcher's funeral - and last time

the Labour leader had easily worsted the PM. Cameron certainly looked nervous.

The bald patch, slightly larger than before, was alarmingly low on the scalp.

And when Huw Irranca-Davies (Lab, Ogmore) asked if his dabs were all over the

rejection of Tanni Grey-Thompson to the chair of Sport England (as a disabled

person, she has had the naked effrontery to criticise the government's attitude

to disability benefits) his face went red, which is never a good sign.



So we were expecting a tremendous fight, Frasier v Ali, perhaps, or even Suarez

v Ivanovic, with both sides chewing lumps out of each other.



And there was plenty for Miliband to sink his fangs into. Another ratings agency

marks us lower than France: France, the Italy of northern Europe! Borrowing

almost imperceptibly down. Unemployment - the one proud claim the coalition

could make - back up again. And if we avoid the triple dip today, that doesn't

mean it ain't coming. Cameron should have been punch drunk, tottering round the

ring, his brain rattling round in his skull.



In fact we got the usual tedious exchange of pointless figures. Miliband had

decided to devote all his six questions to the NHS, which might play well with

focus groups, but only leads into a quagmire or meaningless claims,

counterclaims and dodgy figures. And there are so many statistics attached to

the NHS that either side can prove anything. Twelve-hour waits in A&E, said

Miliband. A&E targets breached only 15 times, said Cameron.



Miliband fought back with numbers conjured from - where? He hit out with

888,000. Cameron fought back with £3bn. Miliband talked about "one in 10

hospitals" without adequate staff; Cameron countered with 6,000 more doctors

(without actually mentioning that these had been recruited for training under

Labour). He also, as Miliband must have realised, could quote reams about the

NHS in Wales, run by Labour.



It wasn't a snarling, bruising, wrestling bout, but more like one conducted with

those giant cotton buds they used to use on the old Gladiators show. Except that

at least those knocked people down.



Immediately afterwards we heard Theresa May talk about the latest setback in her

attempt to deport Abu Qatada. This has become an obsession. If I were David

Cameron, I would say: "Calm down, dear, you have too much on your plate already.

And he is in jail! He can't do any harm to anyone! Chill!"



