





The age of austerity caught up with the European Union yesterday when a

gruelling 26-hour negotiation resulted in agreement to slash the new seven-year

EU budget by 3.3%, or euros 32bn, the first reduced budget in the union's

history.



The outcome was seen as a notable victory for David Cameron, who spearheaded a

north European campaign for budget cuts, and a defeat for his polar opposite in

the bargaining, Francois Hollande, whose pleas for a relaxation of austerity and

for more spending to spur growth were rejected.



"The British public can be proud that we have cut the seven-year credit card

limit for the EU for the first time ever," Cameron said. "The major problem we

have had is the credit card limit for the EU has been too high. It has always

been pushed up and at last someone's come along and said this has got to stop."



But Cameron acknowledged that, while the EU budget as a whole would be reduced,

Britain's own contributions to the EU would increase. He blamed this on changes

to the UK's EU rebate, introduced by Tony Blair in 2005, which ensure that the

12 new member states have a partial exemption from the compensatory payments to

Britain.



Cameron's satisfaction contrasted with Hollande's downbeat tone: "Europe has not

won as much as it could have."



In the short term, Hollande managed to protect French farmers by securing a

euros 1bn increase in the contested common agricultural policy compared with

figures proposed in November. The CAP took up by far the biggest chunk of the

new budget, 39%, but overall farm subsidies and spending are being cut by euros

50bn compared with the seven-year period ending this year as its share of the

total comes down progressively.



Following three years of financial crisis that threw the survival of the euro

into doubt and triggered swingeing cuts in public spending and services in many

EU member states, Cameron argued that the EU budget could not be immune from the

austerity. The summit agreed to cut the budget from more than euros 992bn in the

current period to euros 960bn, or 1% of EU gross domestic product, the figure

stipulated by the strongest politician in the EU, Angela Merkel.



This figure refers to spending pledges, while Cameron opted to focus on the

lower figure of euros 908.4bn, agreed as the supposed ceiling on what may be

spent.



France sought to get the second figure increased to euros 913bn, triggering an

overnight clash between London and Paris, with Germany cast in the role of

mediator and ultimately siding with Cameron.



After snubbing a bargaining session with Cameron and Merkel as the summit opened

on Thursday afternoon, Hollande later conceded. Unusually, senior French

officials paid tribute to the PM.



"He's a true negotiator with a lot of tenacity," said a French official. "At one

point (Hollande) said there needs to be a compromise . . . Cameron did not need

an agreement because the rebate is safe."



The crucial swing factor was Merkel, who broadly sided with Cameron, while

Hollande decided against leading a troika of France, Italy, and Spain.



Given Cameron's recent speech on Europe, committing the UK to an in-out

referendum by 2017, there was much rancour that his views should prevail when it

is not clear if Britain will be in the EU by 2020.



If Cameron won and Hollande lost, there were many who argued that Europe's

future prospects also lost out in a bout of horsetrading that prioritised

national and vested interests over smart investment.



National lobbies were bought off essentially by ransacking planned funding for

digitalisation, broadband investment, hi-tech, research, transport networks, and

infrastructure.



Some euros 50bn was raided from these areas in order to accommodate competing

national claims on the two biggest items in the budget - the CAP and the

cohesion funds that go mainly to eastern Europe and the less developed parts of

the union.



Unlike national budgets, the EU budget cannot be financed by borrowing and

deficit spending is outlawed. The euros 52bn gap between pledged spending and

the spending cap insisted on by Britain had critics predicting trouble ahead.



Martin Schulz, the president of the European parliament, said the budget figures

would break EU law and warned that the parliament would refuse to endorse them.

The budget needs to be passed by an absolute majority. The four biggest

parliamentary caucuses promptly denounced the deal. France sounded supportive of

a rejection.



The PM also demanded savings of up to euros 7bn in the salaries, pensions and

administration costs of the EU institutions. The issue is symbolic - the costs

are only 4% of the budget. The administrative budget was finally cut by only

euros 1bn.



Leader comment, page 38 >=



Captions:



Angela Merkel ultimately sided with Cameron's demand for cuts - and against

Francois Hollande's pleas for spending to spur growth Photograph: Thierry

Roge/EPA



