





Once, with his customary elevation of tone, Ed Balls called the idea of Labour

ruling out an in/out referendum on the EU "stupid". So let me be stupid just for

a moment: Ed Miliband should rule out a referendum now.



Earlier this year Miliband and his colleagues were absolutely right to criticise

the prime minister for his irresponsibility in calling a referendum five years

hence in circumstances unknown and after an at best uncertain negotiation for a

new settlement with the EU. They pointed out the potentially disastrous

consequences for market confidence and inward investment decisions. It would

also be a distraction for the whole EU at a time when it should be concentrating

on getting Europe back to work.



The British people seem not to have fallen for David Cameron's cynical manoeuvre

to shore up his position. If opportunism by a truly Eurosceptic party is not

rewarded by electors, imagine the punishment that would be meted out to a

genuinely pro-European party that lost its nerve on the EU after, perhaps, a

surge in the polls for Ukip at the next European elections; or in the feverish

pre-election atmosphere; or, say, at a party conference in some cack-handed

attempt to regain the initiative. A dose of opportunism may sometimes be

necessary in politics; but make it too blatant and it quite simply backfires.



Suppose we commit to holding an in/out referendum after the next election. Will

the next Labour government have such a rosy inheritance as to afford a luxury

that would not just be a distraction, but would derail our attempts to build

business confidence and attract investment and jobs to the UK?



The Labour approach - working with socialist and progressive allies in other

member states, attacking the austerity orthodoxy and committing the EU to a

growth agenda and strong social policies - would be undermined if we were

planning at the same time, for our own short-termist mediocre reasons, a

referendum that could foreshadow our exit.



So the only possible argument left for those in Labour who say we should opt for

an in/out referendum is the supposed democratic one. "The people" want their say

and that trumps all considerations. But the people's clamour is muffled: Europe

remains low down the list of public concerns.



Supporting the idea that our destiny is bound up with being a central player in

Europe is never going to be a great vote-winner. But Labour would gain respect

for being clear; for the contrast with the irresponsibility of the Tories; for

highlighting the anti-welfare-state agenda of which this is part; and perhaps

for showing a bit of statesmanship in the national interest. We would also find

support among business people. And after all, ultranationalists and Europhobes

will not be voting Labour.



Our chance of winning the election will be determined by the seriousness of our

economic programme, on which the shadow chancellor is doubtless devoting his not

inconsiderable talents. A referendum commitment would undermine its credibility.

Putting a clear and irrevocable stop now to months of media speculation on

whether Labour will triangulate our European future would help to focus our

attack on the miserable coalition record and our alternative.



And speaking of democracy, were Miliband and the shadow cabinet to go for a

referendum, notwithstanding their own previous crystal-clear condemnation of the

Tories' proposal, they would be reversing a central feature of party policy. It

is to be hoped that this could only be contemplated after thorough debate within

the party at all levels, followed by a democratic decision of party members -

not a diktat from on high.



Julian Priestley, a former Labour parliamentary candidate and secretary general

of the European parliament, is the author of Our Europe, Not Theirs



