





Fuelled by copious cups of coffee, David Cameron chalked up a Brussels first at

the all-night EU summit. Looking mildly tired after 25 and a half hours on the

go, the prime minister hailed his achievement in negotiating the first ever cut

in an EU budget.



"The British public can be proud that we have cut the seven-year credit-card

limit for the EU for the first time ever," he said before travelling home.



Cameron will receive a warm, and possibly rapturous, reception from Tory MPs on

Monday when he reports back on securing his aim of a cut or real-terms freeze in

the EU's near-euros 1tn (£845bn) budget. While his red, puffy cheeks showed

signs of a gruelling experience, it is difficult to imagine a better outcome or

more fortunate timing for the prime minister.



Weeks after he was warned that he was marginalising Britain in the EU by

outlining plans for a referendum by 2017, Cameron has shown that Britain can

shape events. He believes the summit shows the wisdom of his three calculations

about the EU: that Britain should never underestimate its ability to be a major

player in the EU; it should not be frightened of laying down red lines not to be

crossed; and most importantly, that the key player in EU negotiations is the

German chancellor, Angela Merkel.



If she is pushed too far, Merkel will bite, as she did in 2011 when she drew up

the eurozone fiscal compact treaty outside the EU after Cameron wielded a veto.

But if she believes that Cameron's demands are reasonable, then she will work

constructively with him, as she did over the EU budget.



Cameron might, however, like to bear in mind the thinking of Merkel's officials

before the first budget summit in November. Berlin was prepared to see Cameron

isolated to show Merkel's displeasure as she awaited his speech on the EU, which

she feared would be hostile. In the end, Merkel worked closely with Cameron in

November for one simple reason: she agreed with his call for restraint.



The German chancellor is keen to co-operate with Cameron at a tactical level -

if she agrees with him - and at a broader strategic level to maintain the UK as

an influential member of the EU as a counterweight to the protectionist French.

But Merkel's support should never be taken for granted.



Cameron will need to calibrate his negotiating stances with care when he embarks

on the delicate task of repatriating EU powers, as he promised in his Bloomberg

speech on the EU.



