





A senior Eurosceptic Tory has warned No 10 that some MPs may defect to Ukip if

David Cameron fails to deliver a referendum on Britain's EU membership before

the next general election.



Bernard Jenkin, the former shadow defence secretary, called on the prime

minister to accelerate his plans to hold a referendum because no vote will be

held if a Lib-Lab pact is formed in 2015, a moment he described as the

"endgame".



The warning by Jenkin shows that anti-EU Tory MPs have been emboldened after

Lord Lawson, the longest serving chancellor in Margaret Thatcher's government,

called for an EU exit. One MP said the intervention by Lawson - pictured above

with Thatcher in 1985 - in yesterday's Times was a "game-changing" moment that

gave respectability to Ukip.



Jenkin said Lawson's remarks highlighted the need for a referendum within the

next two years. Cameron, who has pledged to hold a referendum by 2017 if he wins

the next election, wrote to his MPs yesterday to say he could not legislate for

a referendum this parliament because the Liberal Democrats are currently opposed

to the move.



But No 10 sources have said the prime minister might be prepared to support a

backbench private member's bill in the new session of parliament, which opens

today, that would allow a referendum before the election. Jenkin said the prime

minister needed to act fast.



Asked on Channel 4 News if there might be parliamentary defections to Ukip if no

referendum was held, Jenkin said: "It is a very good question to ask. At the

moment the Conservative party is losing support to Ukip. There are people

defecting to Ukip. I think the Conservative party becomes increasingly difficult

to manage."



Asked again if it was possible there would be defections if Cameron failed to

deliver a referendum this parliament, Jenkin said: "Of course it is a

possibility . . . we're witnessing something of a political earthquake."



It is understood that Jenkin was not signalling that he or other senior figures

would defect.



One MP said: "The Lawson intervention is transformational, a potentially

game-changing moment . . . Conservatives who want to leave the EU, but who have

been nervous about saying so, will now feel less worried about saying that."



Photograph: Daily Express/Getty Images



