





Turkey's prime minister, Recep Tayyip Erdogan, appears to be backing away from a

threatened "final" confrontation to clear thousands of protesters occupying an

Istanbul park, after a series of late-night meetings with representatives of

those involved in street protests which have engulfed dozens of Turkish cities.



In what appeared to be a calculated political move to step back from the violent

confrontations that have left five dead and more than 5,000 injured since

protests erupted in Turkey, Erdogan said yesterday he would suspend plans to

redevelop Gezi Park pending a government court appeal. By offering the

concession Erdogan appears to be counting on the protests fading. The prime

minister had earlier refused to meet with members of Taksim Solidarity.



In a separate development, an Istanbul court released 43 Gezi Park protesters

who had been arrested, meeting another of the demonstrators' demands.



Erdogan's change in tactics comes a day after the European parliament voted to

condemn Turkey for the "harsh measures" used on demonstrators.



Although the largest wave of protests in recent Turkish history was triggered by

a violent crackdown on 31 May on environmental campaigners occupying the park,

the protests have since been transformed into a wider, if loose, coalition of

those opposed to Erdogan and his ruling moderate Islamist AKP, whom they accuse

of creeping authoritarianism.



The promise of a breakthrough emerged in a series of meetings in the capital,

Ankara, and Istanbul. In Ankara, Erdogan met artists and representatives of

Taksim Solidarity, named after the square adjoining Gezi Park that has been the

focus for the worst clashes. Huseyin Celik, deputy chairman of the AKP who

attended the talks, said the meeting had been positive but reiterated Erdogan's

position that the occupation has to end.



"Our government has been very tolerant, as tolerant as it goes in a democracy,

but I don't think the government will leave that place under occupation for

long," he said.



Earlier this week, Taksim Square was cleared by police with water cannon,

teargas and rubber bullets in some of the worst scenes of violence in the

protests.



In Istanbul, the city's governor Huseyin Avni Mutlu also held a five-hour

midnight meeting with young protesters invited via Twitter at a cafe on the

shores of the Bosphorous to hear their complaints.



"We felt they showed sensitivity . . . and did not have an unyielding stance

regarding staying there (in the park)," Mutlu told reporters. Signs of movement

to end the two-week standoff prompted a rally on the Turkish stock market.



Protesters in the park have tentatively welcomed the moves by Erdogan as the

"first positive sign".



Representatives of Taksim Solidarity who attended the meeting said Erdogan had

promised to abide by the outcome of a court case filed in an effort to stop the

redevelopment and would hold a referendum on the plans if the court found in the

government's favour. "The prime minister said that if the results of the public

vote turned out in a way which would leave this area as a park, they will abide

by it," Tayfun Kahraman of the protest group told reporters following the

meeting.



"His comments that the project will not be executed until the judiciary makes

its decision is tonight's positive result."



Taksim Solidarity said in a subsequent statement that it would decide as a whole

what course of action to take after consulting on the results of the overnight

meeting, leaving it unclear whether it would continue protesting.



The pledge by Erdogan - whose party plans rallies in Ankara and elsewhere this

weekend - suggests he has calculated that he can defuse the current political

crisis by putting the onus on the courts, not his own damaged political

reputation, and hope that there is insufficient agreement among those in the

park on other issues for the occupation to continue.



But a poll of those in Gezi Park this week suggested that almost half were there

because of their unhappiness with Erdogan's style of government.



