





The leader of Italy's centre left, Pier Luigi Bersani, set out yesterday to lure

Beppe Grillo and his Five Star Movement (M5S) into a coalition government after

their spectacular breakthrough in the general election.



At a press conference in Rome, a weary-looking Bersani said it was time for the

upstart movement to do something more than just demand the removal of Italy's

mainstream politicians.



"Up to now, they have been saying: 'All go home.' But now they're here, too. So

either they go home as well, or they say what they want to do for their country

and their children."



Grillo had earlier said his followers in parliament would not join a coalition,

but would consider proposals "law by law, reform by reform".



Bersani said that since his four-party alliance had won an outright majority in

the lower house of the Italian parliament, and more seats than any other

grouping in the senate, it had a responsibility to suggest ways in which Italy

could be governed, despite the deadlock in the upper house caused by the M5S's

stunning gains.



Pouring cold water on the idea floated by Silvio Berlusconi of a grand coalition

with the right, he proposed a government committed to a radical overhaul of

Italy's politics and institutions, outlining a five-point plan for sweeping

reform.



In a clear attempt to lure M5S into the mainstream, he hinted that Grillo's

movement, as the party with most votes, should get the speakership of the lower

house.



Talking to reporters outside his home in Genoa, Grillo, who has always denied

being the leader of the M5S, announced he would be representing his movement in

the negotiations with President Giorgio Napolitano aimed at forming a new

government. But he made clear that the movement he co-founded just over three

years ago remained as anti-establishment as ever.



He said he would like to see the iconoclastic Nobel prize-winning playwright and

actor Dario Fo succeed Napolitano as head of state. And he declared that Italy

was in the midst of a "generational war".



Grillo also predicted that Italy's next government would last no more than six

months. "They won't be able to govern," he said. "Whether I'm there or not, they

won't be able govern."



Bersani made it clear that he considered his alliance to have been defeated in

the election. "We have not won, even if we finished first," he said. He also

acknowledged that the elections signified "a rejection of politics as it has

been presented in recent years: (a rejection of) inefficient institutions and of

politics that have appeared as morally non-credible."



The five points on which he was inviting a consensus were: reform of

institutions; reform of political parties; legislation on public and private

morality, an apparent reference to measures to tackle corruption; the defence of

those most exposed to the effects of the recession; and a commitment to a new

European employment policy.



But, in a reference to the thorniest issue that is likely to lie between him and

Grillo, Bersani made it clear he would not compromise on his party's policy

towards the EU or the euro. Grillo has called for a referendum on membership of

the single currency. But, said Bersani, "Italy out of the euro would run into

disaster."



Though at one point he left the door open a crack to Berlusconi's Freedom People

movement, he later said that he and the leader of the right would "confront each

other in parliament".



Bersani was not the only one to be courting Grillo, the new kingmaker of Italian

politics. His overtures to M5S came as his leading partner in the centre left,

Nichi Vendola, dropped a hint he might be considering a separate deal with

Grillo's movement. Vendola, the governor of Puglia, where the centre left took

one of its worst hidings in the election, is also the leader of the radical

Left, Ecology and Freedom party. In a message sent through Twitter, he flattered

the founder of the M5S, saying: "Grillo is the true winner of the elections."

And he added: "Phoney alliances will not be enough."



