





Mario Draghi, president of the European Central Bank, has called for the UK to

be "more European" and said the continent's key institutions could face

dissolution if the UK leaves the European Union.



In a speech to bankers in the City of London, Draghi said: "Europe needs a more

European UK as much as the UK needs a more British Europe."



Speaking almost a year after he vowed to do "whatever it takes" to save the

euro, Draghi said he was not about to enter into a domestic policy debate but

wanted to remind financiers of the "depth of interconnection" between the UK and

Europe.



He said European countries should strengthen their ties and flesh out plans made

last June for closer integration, including a banking union.



"With such deep interconnections, the UK and the euro area share a common

interest: the stability in the functioning of our economic system and

particularly our financial markets," he said.



David Cameron has promised to renegotiate Britain's EU role and hold a

referendum on its membership.



Draghi reminded the audience that all major eurozone banks had important

branches in the City, and Britain's banks were leading players in financial

markets across Europe. "More than twice as many euros are traded in the UK's

foreign exchange market (than) in all the countries of the euro area combined

and more than in the US," he said.



He added that the UK accounted for 40% of non-eurozone deposits in eurozone

banks, and the single currency area was the UK's largest export market,

accounting for £200bn of exports last year.



The Italian central banker said he saw "encouraging signs of tangible

improvements" in the UK, and said Ireland, Spain and Portugal had made

impressive improvements in their export performance.



However, he called on Europe's leaders to focus on "securing economic stability

and prosperity for the people of Europe" by forging ahead with deeper

integration.



"After a deep financial and economic crisis, we now see the restart of the

European process, building on the agreement of the June 2012 summit," said

Draghi. "This process ultimately entails some transfer of national sovereignty

in the areas of budget and structural policies."



The answer to the crisis in the eurozone, he added, "has not been less Europe

but more Europe. "We can . . . safely say that our economic and monetary union

is a more stable union today than it was a year ago."



However, he pressed eurozone governments to shape up their economies.



He said banking union was key. A first step in this plan involves the creation

of a single bank supervisor under the ECB.



