





Turkey's prime minister defied a growing wave of international criticism

yesterday and issued a chilling warning to the protesters who have captured

central Istanbul for a fortnight, declaring that the demonstrations against his

rule would be over within 24 hours.



Recep Tayyip Erdogan's ultimatum, which he said was conveyed to his police chief

and interior minister, ratcheted up the tension in Turkey after a relatively

calm day following the mass teargas attacks by riot police in Istanbul city

centre on Tuesday evening.



"We have not responded to punches with punches. From now on security forces will

respond differently," Erdogan said after meeting a team said to be representing

the protesters for the first time. "This issue will be over in 24 hours."



The sense of a looming denouement at Gezi Park off Taksim Square in central

Istanbul was reinforced when a deputy leader of Erdogan's ruling Justice and

Development party (AKP) said the park had to be cleared of demonstrators as soon

as possible.



Thousands of protesters again gathered at the park yesterday, with phalanxes of

riot police marshalling nearby.



The ruling party's deputy chairman and government Huseyin Celik added that a

city-wide referendum could be held on the initial issue that sparked the wave of

national protest - whether the park should be demolished to make way for a

shopping mall and a replica of an old military barracks.



The belligerent statement, contrasting with more conciliatory language from

President Abdullah Gul.



The sense of a final showdown was reinforced by Istanbul's governor, Huseyin

Avni Mutlu, who ordered the protesters to clear the park for their own "safety".



"Families should take their children out of there," he warned.



Protest leaders in the park, however, pledged to stay put as around 1,000

lawyers also took to the streets to complain about the detention of 45 of their

colleagues on Tuesday.



The umbrella group behind the protest uniting dozens of trade and professional

associations, Taksim Solidarity, denounced the talks with the prime minister in

Ankara as illegitimate.



"No meeting, while the police violence disregarding right to life so

relentlessly continues in and around the Gezi Park, will produce results," it

said. "We are waiting for you in Gezi Park. We are here and we are not leaving."



In the strongest criticism yet of Erdogan's hard line, the European Union

contradicted the prime minister and voiced support for the protesters, saying

they had been largely peaceful and subject to indiscriminate violence from riot

police. It demanded an investigation of the extreme reaction, and called on

Erdogan to cancel rallies of his Justice and Development party (AKP) scheduled

for the weekend.



"There is a real polarisation of opinion. Major AKP rallies this weekend would

risk adding to the tension," said Catherine Ashton, the EU's foreign policy

chief.



Guido Westerwelle, the German foreign minister, added: "We expect Prime Minister

Erdogan to de-escalate the situation and to seek a peaceful dialogue."



