





A deluge of support for extreme right parties and Ukip - the party that

advocates extreme free markets for everything except people - is the unsettling

expectation when Europe goes to the polls in six months' time. Austerity or

austerity-lite policies of the ruling right, left and centre that worsen the

economic insecurity of the majority make this rightward lurch inevitable.

Another huge political turn-off for most Europeans is the political

establishment's view that an uncontrolled flow of citizens across borders is an

unchallengeable force of EU nature, akin to gravity. Watch electoral support for

the establishment crumble further after 1 January as the public responds to the

predicted increase of migrants from Romania and Bulgaria.



The usual UK response to this grim state of affairs is for those in the

Westminster bubble to call for a referendum on whether it would be more

efficient in market terms to be inside Europe. Big business champions the

former, Ukip the latter, with pro- or anti-EU politicians affirming that their

way is the route to a nirvana of increased international competition and booming

exports. Of course, some try to have it both ways by claiming we can win this

game with a canny "race-to-the-top" approach to wages and conditions. To such

fantasists, there is a one-word answer: "Grangemouth". The unions and workers

were crushed, as will always be the case, by the threat from big business to

relocate. This has been allowed to become a trump card because all major

political parties support open markets.



To turn the EU from its job-destroying, socially divisive and environmentally

damaging trajectory will require a continent-wide debate, backed up by a

referendum about whether member states should be allowed to protect and

rediversify their economies. This would mean returning to the nation state the

power to control the flow of goods, money, services and people at their borders.

Such a grouping of countries would need to work co-operatively to tackle

cross-border issues, such as climate change, pollution and crime.



Europe is a powerful enough bloc to implement such a radical programme. It is

likely to find increasing support from a populus fast falling out of love with

open borders. The lightning rod to force public discussion of these changes is

the resentment felt by the majority about the Brussels diktat over the free flow

of people within Europe. Ukip does well, not because people are bothered about

Europe per se, but because Nigel Farage can correctly say that if the UK left

the EU it could take back control of immigration.



The centre and left have an aversion to discussing the democratic deficit

inherent in the denial of the majority's desire for stricter immigration

control. The usual use of statistics showing that fit, young, ambitious

immigrants pay more taxes and use fewer public services holds less sway than

more tangible local examples of the pressure new eastern European families are

putting upon overstretched maternity wards and infant schools. Immigration,

though usually good for the migrants concerned, is a bosses' charter. Those with

the upper hand range from owners of big food processing, care or hospitality

companies to the middle classes cooing about how polite, hardworking and cheap

eastern European workers are.



Of course, achieving such a huge U-turn will take time. The expected triumph of

the extreme right and extreme free traders in the 2014 elections must finally

wake us up to the need to put border controls and economic security at the heart

of debates about future alternatives. The centre left will be forced to face up

to their self-inflicted defeat. Not before time.



Colin Hines is convenor of the Green New Deal Group



