





The Obama administration has warned British officials that if the UK leaves

Europe it will exclude itself from a US-EU trade and investment partnership

potentially worth hundreds of billions of pounds a year, and that it is very

unlikely that Washington would make a separate deal with Britain.



The warning comes in the wake of David Cameron's visit to Washington, which was

primarily intended as a joint promotion with Barack Obama of the Transatlantic

Trade and Investment Partnership (TTIP), which the prime minister said could

bring £10bn a year to the UK alone, but which was overshadowed by a cabinet

rebellion back in London.



The threat by ministers to back a UK exit in a referendum on the EU raised

doubts in Washington about whether Britain would still be part of the deal once

it had been negotiated. More immediately, Obama administration officials were

concerned that the uncertainty over Britain's future would further complicate

what is already a hard sell in Congress, threatening a central pledge in the

president's state of the union address in February.



With formal negotiations expected to start within weeks, the state department

already has hundreds of staff working on the partnership. Sources at US-UK

meetings in London last week said American officials had made it clear that it

would take a monumental effort to get TTIP through a suspicious Congress and

that "there would very little appetite" in Washington for doing it all again

with the UK if Britain walked out of Europe.



"Having Britain in the EU . . . is going to strengthen the possibility that we

succeed in a very difficult negotiation, as it involves so many different

interests and having Britain as a key player and pushing for this will be

important," a senior US official said. "We have expressed our views of Britain's

role in the EU and they haven't changed. TTIP negotiations underscore why we

think it's important that it continues."



US officials say that the White House is particularly perplexed because Britain

played a key role in persuading Obama to stake significant political capital on

the ambitious transatlantic partnership. If it is successful it could be the

biggest trade and investment deal in history, encompassing half the world's GDP

and a third of its trade.



On both sides of the Atlantic there is hope that the boost provided by removing

remaining barriers to US-EU trade and investment would help lift the west, and

then the global economy, out of the doldrums.



Writing in the US press this year, the British ambassador to Washington, Sir

Peter Westmacott, said "a bold and comprehensive deal could be worth 1%-2% in

additional GDP on both sides of the Atlantic. Even a 1% bump would translate, at

current GDP levels, into an extra $325bn." He added that the UK shared the Obama

administration's optimism that it could be completed in less than two years.



Addressing the Senate last week, the US under-secretary of state for economic

growth, energy and the environment, Robert Hormats, said the TTIP "is, in many

respects, a once-in-a-generation opportunity to reshape our relationship with

the European Union". Hormats added it "will enhance our ability to build

stronger relationships with emerging economies in Asia and elsewhere around the

world".



Both European and American officials involved in preparatory talks on the

partnership said it was also intended as a bulwark against the economic

challenge of China, aimed at forming a bloc powerful enough to lay down the

rules of international trade and investment.



They pointed to the fact that Turkey's prime minister, Recep Tayyip Erdogan,

flew to Washington this month specifically to try to persuade Obama to include

his country in negotiations. Officials said this was a reflection of the

gravitational pull the partnership could exert on the rest of the world.



£10bn



The amount of money that is said to be at stake a year for the UK from the new

US-EU trade and investment partnership



