





The extent of Tory concern over the rise of Ukip burst into the open last night

as senior Conservatives demanded two referendums on Europe - the first next

spring - in a bid to halt the rise of Nigel Farage's rampant anti-EU party.



Members of the Thatcherite No Turning Back group broke cover to call for the

two-stage referendum package, after the Conservatives suffered heavy defeats at

the hands of Ukip in Thursday's council elections.



While the Tories' loss of 335 seats was less than some party figures had feared,

Ukip's surge to 23% of the vote - just 2% behind the Tories - reinforced their

fear that Farage and his team could emerge as the largest party from next year's

European elections. Tories are increasingly concerned that, if they fail to act,

Farage could go on to inflict serious damage on their prospects of keeping

Labour out of power at the 2015 general election.



The MPs demanding an urgent response, including David Davis, the former

leadership challenger, called on David Cameron to give the public absolute

certainty about his intentions over Europe by legislating soon for an initial

"mandate" referendum, to take place next year, ahead of or at the same time as

the European elections in May.



The purpose would be to strengthen the prime minister's negotiating hand and

show the party was serious about securing a new deal for the UK in the face of

the Ukip charge.



In the first referendum, people would be asked to give Cameron authority to

renegotiate the terms of UK membership on issues such as employment policy,

co-operation over police and justice policy, and immigration. A second in/out

referendum would be held, as is planned in the next parliament, in which people

would be asked if they wanted to remain in the EU after a deal was reached with

the UK's EU partners.



Davis told the Observer that having a first referendum next year would be "an

absolute Ukip killer", as Farage would have either to back the plan or show his

inflexibility. "It would massively reinforce the prime minister's negotiating

hand and put some steel in his back," he said. "He would be more likely to

return from any negotiation with a good deal that would mean we stay in the EU."



Tory MP David Ruffley said that Cameron's previous pledge to hold an in/out

referendum in 2017 after any new treaty is negotiated had not registered with

the public, as it was too distant and vague.



"David Cameron has to have a clear, sharper message on Europe because most

people are not aware of his referendum pledge," he said.



"This would be a concrete vote showing that Conservatives are serious about

getting a referendum. It is about focusing minds. This Ukip insurgency is real

and it's serious. Twelve months from now we will have another dose of this (at

the council and European elections). We have to act now."



MPs concede it is too late to insert a bill for a first referendum into this

week's Queen's speech - which the coalition will use to highlight measures to

boost the economy, including legislation for the HS2 high-speed rail line

between London, Birmingham, Manchester and Leeds - but say one could be

introduced within the next few months.



Such a move is bound to be resisted by the pro-EU Liberal Democrats, who say the

government should stand by existing coalition policy. A party official said: "We

should not spend the next year obsessing about Europe. We should concentrate on

what really concerns people, which is their living standards."



Home secretary Theresa May yesterday conceded that the government had to show

"greater certainty" about its intention to hold a referendum on EU membership,

but said the negotiations, which will happen after 2015, had to take place

first. She said: "If you want to take a renegotiated settlement to the British

people, you have to renegotiate it. We can look at whether we can give some

greater certainty in terms of the referendum."



She did not rule out legislation in the current parliament to pave the way for a

referendum, despite the tensions it would create with the Tories' Lib Dem

coalition partners.



Farage has the last laugh In Focus, 30-31



Observer Comment 38



Andrew Rawnsley 39



