





Trouble, thy name is Nigel. Or so it must seem to David Cameron. In a week, the

prime minister's authority has been rocked by Nigel Farage, shaken by the Nigel

Evans allegations and now openly challenged by the most important Nigel in

recent Conservative history. It is 24 years since Nigel Lawson's resignation

signalled the endgame of Margaret Thatcher's premiership. And it needs to be

stressed that, for most people under the age of 40, the former chancellor is

much less of a name these days than his daughter. Nevertheless, Lord Lawson

proved this week that, at 81, he is still one of the most articulate figures in

politics and has lost none of his sense of theatre. By saying, on the eve of the

Queen's Speech, that he thinks Britain should now quit the European Union, he

has poured petrol on the flames already licking through the Conservative mansion

after last week's local election defeats.



There can be no disputing that Lord Lawson's change of heart on the EU - he

voted yes to British membership, along with Lady Thatcher herself, back in 1975

- reflects his party's own historic change of view over Europe, between the Ted

Heath era and that of David Cameron. It is representative, too, of the more

sceptical mood of the public, judging by the opinion polls. But it goes

completely against Mr Cameron's optimism that he can negotiate a new

relationship with the EU and win a referendum to endorse that view - and Lord

Lawson knows this very well. The former chancellor has therefore chosen his time

with malice aforethought, in order to make life much harder for the prime

minister.



Lord Lawson's move is also a reminder that, for all his occasional brilliance,

he sometimes calls big things wrong. It was he who encouraged sterling to shadow

the Deutschmark so that the UK could join the European fixed exchange rate

system - only for the ejection of the UK from that system in 1992 to seal the

Tory party's fate for a generation. It is he who, in increasingly dismissive

terms, has become this country's leading climate change denier - a stance that

has given a more general permission to the Tory party to back off from the

scientific approach to which Lady Thatcher, no less, first led it. And it is he

who, only 18 months ago, wrote that the eurozone needed time and the EU needed

reform to get themselves through their crises - yet it is he who has now

abandoned the patient approach and who is prejudging the whole outcome.



Lord Lawson is not just wrong about the underlying issue of Britain and Europe.

He is also wrong even from his own party's point of view. His move is doomed to

make life more difficult for both Mr Cameron and for the Tory party - and thus

to make it much harder for the Tories to win the 2015 election and be able to

hold the referendum which the prime minister promised in his speech in January

and on which so much is now staked.



The Tory party has been spooked by Ukip's successes in the local elections. Many

Tories wish their party embraced Ukip's signature policy of EU withdrawal. They

draw the false conclusion that a more strongly Eurosceptic stance will reduce

the Ukip threat, which, they reason, would allow the Tories to recapture their

popularity and a majority in 2015. In fact, Lord Lawson's move means the reverse

is more likely to be true - as the polls also suggested after Mr Cameron's

January speech. The more that the Tories show themselves obsessed with Europe,

which is not the main issue facing this country, the more they appear out of

touch with public concerns and the more their divisions give voters permission

to look elsewhere, including, ironically, to Ukip.



All this forms an unimpressive political backdrop to the new parliamentary

session today. In the last full session before the 2015 general election

overshadows everything, the government ought to be focused on the public's

priorities, not on those of the Tory party. Instead, the Tory part of the

coalition seems to have got everything the wrong way around. It is therefore a

moment of opportunity not for the Tories, but for their political opponents.



