





Turkey's prime minister, Recep Tayyip Erdogan, delivered a stark "final warning"

yesterday to thousands of defiant protesters still camped out in Istanbul's Gezi

park, demanding that they end their occupation.



Describing the protesters as troublemakers, Erdogan said the government had

reached the "end of its patience" over the continuing demonstrations against his

leadership, in which five people have been killed since 31 May. Erdogan had

earlier issued a 24-hour deadline to clear Taksim Square and Gezi park.



He spoke as the latest person to die in the demonstrations was named as

26-year-old Ethem Sarisuluk, who had been on life support for days. He was

pronounced dead after he was hit in the head by a tear gas canister on 1 June

during a protest in the capital, Ankara.



The protests erupted after a violent police crackdown on 31 May following a

sit-in by activists objecting to a development project that would involve

cutting down the trees in Gezi park and replacing them with a replica of an

Ottoman-era barracks. Since then, protests have spread to dozens of cities and

been transformed into a broader complaint over Erdogan's style of government.



Erdogan also hit out at criticism overseas of the force being used. The European

parliament has voted to condemn the use of "harsh measures" against peaceful

protesters and urged Erdogan to take a unifying and conciliatory stance.



"We have arrived at the end of our patience," Erdogan told local party leaders

in a speech in Ankara yesterday. "I am giving you my final warning."



He urged parents with children at the park to convince them to pack up and go

home. He added that he had instructed police that "we cannot allow lawbreakers

to hang around freely in this square . . . We will clean the square".



Responding to the vote in the European parliament in Strasbourg, Erdogan added:

"I won't recognise the decision that the European Union parliament is going to

take about us . . . Who do you think you are by taking such a decision?"



Although there were no fresh clashes yesterday, many have interpreted Erdogan's

remarks as a clear signal that he will move soon to clear the park of

protesters.



A new poll of those occupying Gezi park suggests that almost 60% are protesting

about Erdogan's style of government, which opponents have criticised for its

creeping authoritarianism.



Despite the warnings, new protesters of all ages continued to arrive in the

camp, insisting they would not be frightened away.



Among them was Kerim Ozken, 63, a retired bank worker and writer. "I think the

police might attack again tonight," he said, reflecting the fears of many in the

camp. "Tayyip (Erdogan) said it will be over tonight. He thinks it is a war. It

is idiotic. Really idiotic. He thinks he can change people's minds by force."



So far during the protests, 5,000 protesters and 600 police have been reported

injured.



Erdogan's defiant tone comes despite the floating of a proposal to have a

popular referendum on the fate of the park. Pouring cold water on that notion, a

senior judge insisted that the courts had already ruled on the development.



Captions:



The Turkish prime minister, Recep Tayyip Erdogan, hit out at the European

parliament's criticism of his 'harsh measures'



