





There are serious questions in politics. And there are silly questions.

Britain's place in the European Union is a serious question of the first order.

So, possibly with some reservations, is a referendum on continued British

membership of the EU. But James Wharton MP's European Union (referendum) bill,

on which the massed ranks of Conservative MPs will vote at Westminster today,

does not raise a serious question at all. Instead, this attempt to bind the next

parliament to hold a referendum in 2017 is a sideshow, even by the standards of

the farce that now passes for Conservative party debate on Europe. It is a silly

stunt, nothing more and nothing less, and the closer the day of the vote has

come, the sillier it has looked.



It is less than six months since David Cameron - a Conservative leader who once

sensibly warned his party against banging on about Europe - went to the City of

London and banged on that a future Tory government would hold a referendum on UK

membership of the EU in 2017. This was meant to cement Mr Cameron's control over

his party over Europe. But in May, after Ukip electoral successes had put the

wind up the Tory party (much of which believes Ukip is right about leaving the

EU anyway), a succession of serving and former ministers said they want Britain

out, while more than 100 Tory MPs then voted for a stronger referendum pledge.

Mr Cameron, who had previously opposed the idea of legislating in this

parliament for a referendum in the next one, promptly published a bill to make

it happen, which Mr Wharton has now picked up as a piece of private member's

legislation. Even more bizarrely, Mr Cameron has insisted that all Tory MPs must

support it, on a three-line whip. As a constitutional position it is a nonsense,

because no parliament can bind its successors. As an exercise in leadership it

has been shameful.



Politics, though, is a fickle business. The same Conservatives who lost their

heads over Europe and plotted against Mr Cameron in May have now rather lost

their interest in the bill which they once deemed to be so crucial to his

leadership. Just conceivably, this may have something to do with the recent

drop-off in poll support and publicity for Ukip. Fear of Ukip on the Tory

benches has not disappeared but it has certainly declined. At any event, as the

second reading of the Wharton bill loomed, the EU referendum issue has been

relegated to the margins. There is no drumbeat of expectation about the outcome

of today's vote and no head of steam in the rightwing press either. None of the

Europhobes on the Tory backbenches who used to make Mr Cameron's life a misery

have made any trouble for him. Instead, Mr Cameron and his backbenchers are all

having a barbecue in the Downing Street garden. The skewers will stay in the

kebabs.



It is just as well that expectations have been lowered about today's vote.

Labour and Liberal Democrat MPs have adopted the simple expedient of going back

to their own constituencies as usual this Friday, thus denying Mr Wharton the

chance to inflate this exercise into a major political event. They are right to

do so, because today's vote is a masquerade. It is up to the voters what the

2015 parliament looks like and whether it holds a referendum on the EU. It is

not up to a Tory parliamentary party which does not even have a majority in this

parliament to make that choice. Mr Wharton will presumably win the vote today.

But it will be an entirely hollow achievement.



This is emphatically not serious politics or serious government. It is not even

serious as an exercise in party management. The parliamentary Conservative party

posed for a team photograph on the green benches at Westminster last night. But

divisions on Europe between those who want to leave and those who want to stay

remain as large as ever. Europe remains a fundamental and serious question in

British life - as the head of the CBI rightly argued again this week. But the

Tory party no longer has anything serious to say about it.



