





George Osborne is being blamed by rightwing Conservatives for fuelling

speculation about the leadership ambitions of Theresa May as part of the

chancellor's attempt to "disable" cabinet ministers who are fighting further

spending cuts.



As backbenchers express increasing confidence that David Cameron will face a

challenge to his leadership later this summer, the home secretary will today set

out her views at a conference organised by the ConservativeHome website.



The speech by May, who has been leading calls by cabinet ministers against

further cuts to their budgets, follows a series of carefully calibrated

interventions to burnish her credentials on the right. Earlier in the week the

Daily Mail reported that the home secretary was planning to impose a financial

bond on some immigrants.



One senior Tory said: "When you are halfway through a parliament there is a

natural tendency for people to start positioning themselves. I do not

underestimate the ambitions of Theresa May."



But a leading rightwinger detected the hand of the chancellor under pressure

from the so-called national union of ministers. This group, led by the home

secretary with support from the defence secretary, Philip Hammond, is attempting

to focus future spending cuts away from departments such as the Home Office and

the Ministry of Defence. The MP said: "George is clearly encouraging speculation

about Theresa and Philip. It disables them."



May was thrust into the spotlight this week when Ed Miliband made light of her

apparent leadership ambitions during prime minister's questions when she sat

next to Hammond. The home secretary gave Miliband a thunderous look when he

said: "I am looking forward to facing her when they are in opposition."



The speculation has been prompted by a growing belief among some backbenchers,

as the Guardian revealed last weekend, that the prime minister will face a vote

of no confidence later in the summer if the chancellor fails to inspire

confidence in the budget and the Tories perform poorly in the local elections in

May.



A vote will be triggered if 46 Tory MPs write to Graham Brady, the chairman of

the backbench 1922 committee. "It is surprising how widely the unease is

spreading," one MP said.



According to today's Times, only seven percent of Conservative party members

believe Cameron can win an outright majority at the next general election.

Quoting an internal party poll the paper says three-quarters of party members

believe Labour will be in power after the 2015 election.



Tory MPs have mixed thoughts about May. She is said to be modelling herself on

John Major, who carefully and surreptitiously positioned himself to succeed

Margaret Thatcher by reaching out to the right. One MP said: "Theresa is clearly

serious about it. But she is not a leader. She is a loner. She works very hard.

She is clearly a good home secretary. But she is not a leader."



One well-placed Tory was scornful of May's "submarine" strategy, in which she

adopts a low media profile and surfaces at times of her own choosing. "It's not

much of a submarine strategy if we are all talking about it," the MP said. "I

think Theresa's submarine must have a defective sonar." Another MP thought a

telltale sign was May's decision not to dampen speculation about her leadership

intentions. The MP said: "If Theresa thought all this was ridiculous she could

say it's all daft and there is no vacancy. But nobody in her team has done

that."



Others say the speculation about May has been prompted by the tactics of her

parliamentary private secretary, George Hollingbery, who replaced Edward Timpson

when he was appointed children's minister. Hollingbery, a millionaire who has

put his north Cornwall cottage at the disposal of Cameron's family, has run a

more political operation for the home secretary.



"George has made a simple calculation," one MP said of Hollingbery, who is a

member of the executive of the 1922 committee. "He knows that the job of a home

secretary involves permanently crossing a minefield where you never know if it

is going to blow up in your face. She therefore needs to have good links with

the backbenches and will do herself no harm if she tacks to the right. George

has been instrumental in all of that because he is a little more worldly than

Edward."



Another MP said: "Is George plotting to ensure Theresa May is replacing David

Cameron? No, he is not. Is he thinking that his star could rise with Theresa's

in the future? Of course he is."



The speculation about May comes as the Tory right plans to intensify the

pressure on No 10 by demanding that the prime minister issue an immediate

challenge to the Liberal Democrats on an early EU "mandate" referendum. This

would be an initial referendum to give the prime minister a mandate to negotiate

a change in the terms of Britain's membership of the EU. This would then be

followed be a "decision" referendum.



Captions:



Westminster gossip suggests Theresa May has designs on Downing Street



