





In the hunt for historical precedents for Ukip's breakthrough today, three full

decades of Guardian/ICM polling disappoint. The Green party briefly registered

8% in July 1989, after performing spectacularly well in the European elections

of the same year, but that is less than half the 18% achieved by the surging

fourth party which has leaped into third place.



To find a sharper disruption to the settled pattern of polling it is necessary

to go back to the creation of the SDP in 1981. Gallup briefly recorded that

party's new alliance with the Liberals hitting a startling 50%.



While it is the Conservatives who continue to pay the heaviest price for Ukip's

arrival as a major player in national polls, the detailed data confirms that the

Liberal Democrats and latterly Labour are also now seeping serious support. Back

in April, when Ukip were on 9% nationwide, 10% of Tory voters at the 2010

election had defected to Nigel Farage's party, compared with 2% of 2010 Labour

voters and 8% of 2010 Lib Dems. The defection has now gathered pace: over a

quarter of Cameron's 2010 backers, 27%, had switched to Ukip by May. Some 13% of

2010 Labour supporters have gone the same way, together with 12% of 2010 Lib

Dems.



Figuring out how Farage's current support would cash in at a general election is

fraught with difficulty, because under Britain's first-past-the-post system

everything depends on where votes are concentrated, and with Ukip having been so

much smaller in 2010 past experience offers little guide. Mechanically applying

a uniform surge in Ukip support underlines how tough it is for a new party to

break through. Using the new ICM figures, the Electoral Calculus model projects

that the next parliament would end up with 228 Tory seats (down 79), 359 Labour

(up 101, and enough for an overall majority of 68) and 35 for the Lib Dems

(implying 22 losses). In this scenario, Ukip would be left with no seats at all,

its voters left even more under-represented than SDP supporters in 1983 - when

the Alliance was left with a mere 23 seats from more than a quarter of the vote.



In the recent council elections Ukip surprised number-crunchers by picking up as

many seats as it did by winning where it mattered. But even if it can get better

at concentrating votes through targeted campaigns, it will face an uphill

struggle to secure more than a handful of MPs.



Founded exactly 20 years ago, on the single issue of taking Britain out of the

then-new European Union, a nationwide surge of Euroscepticism would be the

obvious explanation for Ukip's ascendency - but there is no strong evidence for

that in the poll. Although most people would like a say on Europe, there is no

sense of urgency. Little more than one voter in every three (35%) demands an

instant referendum, compared with 13% who are content to wait till general

election day, and 30% who are happy to wait longer - until after David Cameron's

promised renegotiation of membership. Some 14% say that the referendum should

never take place at all.



Just before the prime minister's January speech, which first floated the

prospect of an in/out plebiscite, ICM found a 51%-40% majority for quitting the

EU. Far from rushing their leaders towards the door, voters have cooled on the

idea since, and opinion is now almost evenly split: 43% say they would vote to

quit, against a steady 40% who are inclined to stay in.



Since January there has actually been a four-point drop in the proportion saying

they would definitely vote for Britain to leave the EU (a figure that now stands

at 32%) and also in the proportion who would probably vote to leave (now 11%).

Twice as many voters as before now say they are unsure about how they would vote

- 17% as compared with 8% in January.



Other recent polling by IpsosMori suggests that fewer than one voter in every 10

regards Europe as the most pressing issue facing the country, a fraction of

those who named it as such in the late 1990s.



All of this should give pause for thought to the Tory MPs who will tomorrow use

a vote in the Commons to try to force Cameron to write his referendum promise

into law, but it also renders Ukip's sudden surge more mysterious. Success in

the shire elections has secured publicity, and thereby begotten more success -

but that still leaves those shire election results in need of explanation. The

poll suggests that disgruntlement about a political class perceived as

hopelessly out of touch could be the real root cause.



The fury of a Ukip vote - which is disproportionately male (25% of men), elderly

(23% of pensioners) and poor (27% of voters in the unskilled DE occupational

grade) - is not restricted to Europe, but is far more diffuse. They dislike Ed

Miliband (76% say he is doing a bad job) almost as much as the EU (which 77% say

they would definitely vote to quit). They are scarcely keener on David Cameron;

the way he does his job gets the thumbs-down from 68% of Ukip supporters. And

55% believe David Cameron and Nick Clegg are wrong to try and govern together in

coalition.



In their distaste for Britain's established political leaders, the mood of Ukip

voters is simply a more extreme version of that besetting voters as a whole. The

wider electorate flips the thumbs down at Miliband by a 48%-26% margin,

virtually unchanged from the nadir he registered last month, and by 50%-35% it

does the same towards Cameron.



Against this sort of competition, it is not hard to shine, but Farage's own

ratings - with 40% saying he is doing well against 23% who say the opposite -

are remarkably positive for any politician in these anti-political times.



ICM Research interviewed a random sample of 1,001 adults aged 18 and over by

telephone on 10-12 May 2013. Interviews were conducted across the country and

the results have been weighted to the profile of all adults. ICM is a member of

the British Polling Council and abides by its rules.



